



Pattachitra - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Etymology







2Odisha Pattachitra


				Toggle Odisha Pattachitra subsection
			




2.1Origin and History







2.2Theme and Style







2.3Technique







2.4Colour







2.5Palm leaf Pattachitra







2.6Saura painting









3Bengal Patachitra


				Toggle Bengal Patachitra subsection
			




3.1Origin and History







3.2Theme and Style







3.3Aspects of painting





3.3.1Chalchitra







3.3.2Durga Pot









3.4Technique







3.5Colour







3.6Artists









4Geographical Indication of Pattachitra







5References







6Further reading







7External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Pattachitra




8 languages



বাংলাEspañolFrançaisहिन्दीമലയാളംNederlandsଓଡ଼ିଆதமிழ்
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Traditional art work of West Bengal and  Odisha, India.


Pattachitra or
PatachitraGeographical indication
Odisha Pattachitra (top) depicting Radha Krishna and West Bengal Patachitra (bottom) depicting Durga.Alternative namesOD: ପଟ୍ଟଚିତ୍ର BN: পটচিত্রDescriptionPatachitra (or Pattachitra in Odisha) is an old traditional art of Odisha and West BengalArea
Raghurajpur, Puri, Danda Sahi, Parlakhemundi, Chikiti, Digapahandi, Sonepur, Dharakote (Odisha)[1][2]
Birbhum, West Midnapore, Nayagram of Pingla block in Jhargram, Bardhaman, Murshidabad district and Kalighat region (West Bengal)[3][4]
CountryIndiaRegistered
Odisha Pattachitra: 10 July 2008
Bengal Patachitra: 28 March 2018
MaterialCloth, Palm leaf, Paper, Color, ThemeOfficial websiteipindiaservices.gov.in
Patachitra or Pattachitra is a general term for traditional, cloth-based scroll painting,[5] based in the eastern Indian states of Odisha,[6][7] West Bengal[8] and parts of Bangladesh. Patachitra artform is known for its intricate details as well as mythological narratives and folktales inscribed in it. Pattachitra is one of the ancient artworks of Odisha, originally created for ritual use and as souvenirs for pilgrims to Puri, as well as other temples in Odisha.[9] Patachitras are a component of an ancient Bengali narrative art, originally serving as a visual device during the performance of a song.[10]


Etymology[edit]
In the Sanskrit, paṭṭa means "cloth" and chitra means "picture". Most of these paintings depict stories of Hindu deities.[11]

Odisha Pattachitra[edit]
 Large earthen pot with the outer surface and the lid painted with Pattachitra, Odisha Museum, India.
 Pattachitra of Lord Jagarnath
 Pattachitra made on palm leaf, Odisha.
Pattachitra is a traditional painting of Odisha, India.[1] These paintings are based on Hindu mythology and specially inspired by Jagannath and Vaishnava sect.[12]  All colours used in the Paintings are natural and paintings are made fully old traditional way by Chitrakaras that is Odiya Painter. Pattachitra style of painting is one of the oldest and most popular art forms of Odisha. The name Pattachitra has evolved from the Sanskrit words patta, meaning canvas, and chitra, meaning picture. Pattachitra is thus a painting done on canvas, and is manifested by rich colourful application, creative motifs, and designs, and portrayal of simple themes, mostly mythological in depiction.[13] The traditions of pattachitra paintings are more than thousand years old.
[14][15]

 Study of a Pattachitra painting depicting the Gopis on the banks of the Yamuna, circa 1550. Odisha.
Origin and History[edit]
The paintings of Odisha can be divided into three categories from the point of view of medium, i.e. paintings on cloth or 'Patta Chitra', paintings on walls or 'Bhitti Chitra' and palm leaf engravings or "Tala Patra Chitra' or "Pothi, Chitra'.[16] The style of all these remains more or less the same at a specific time because the then artists were commissioned to work in all these media, it is believed.[according to whom?][citation needed]
The painting the 'pattachitra' resemble the old murals of Odisha especially religious centres of Puri, Konark and Bhubaneshwar region, dating back to the 5th century BC. The best work is found in and around Puri, especially in the village of Raghurajpur.[17]
This old tradition of Odia painting still survives in places like Puri, Raghurajpur, Paralakhemundi, Chikiti and Sonepur. Lord Jagannath in the present from is being taken as the origin of the Patta style. The colour schemes of the deities of Puri are quite similar to those of the Patta style. The oldest record of Patta Paintings does not probably go beyond the establishment of the present shrine of Shri Jagannath at Puri. It may be due to the fact that paintings do not survive like sculptures. The paints inside the shrines of Lord Jagannath at Puri make the date probable. The oldest classical marble paintings of Sitabanji at Keonjhar do not conform to the present style of Patta painting wholly. The wooden statues of the three deities are also covered with cloth and then overlaid with glue mixed with chalk, and then given paint only with four limited colours of red, yellow, white and black. The deities who are held in high esteem by the Odias and who inspire religion, life and activity of the people also carry with them a tradition of art and painting which is as old as the deities themselves. If the Savara origin of Jagannath is accepted, the date of the Patta paintings can be dated back to an earlier period. These paintings were originally substitutes for worship on days when the idols were kept away from the public after their ritual bath. [18]

 Pattachitra painting of Raga Kodaba of Odissi music depicted in the form of two lovers. Pigment on cloth, 16 x 12cm, Odisha, mid-nineteenth century. Private collection
Theme and Style[edit]
The theme of Odia painting centres round the Jagannath and the Vaishnava sect. Since beginning of Pattachitra culture, Lord Jagannath who was an incarnation of Lord Krishna has been the major source of inspiration. The subject matter of Pattachitra is mostly mythological, religious stories and folk lore. Themes are chiefly on Lord Jagannath and Radha-Krishna, different "Vesas" of Shri Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra, temple activities, the ten incarnations of Vishnu basing on the 'Gita Govinda' of Jayadev, Kama Kujara Navagunjara, Ramayana, Mahabharata.[19] The individual paintings of gods and goddesses are also being painted.
The Pattachitra style are mix of both folk and classical elements but leanings more towards folk forms. The dress style has Mughal influences. All of the poses have been confined to a few well-defined postures. These are not free from monotonous repetitions, though at times this is necessary to accentuate the narrative character of the style. The lines are bold and clean and angular and sharp. Generally, there are no landscapes, perspectives, and distant views. All the incidents are seen in close juxtaposition. The background on which the figures are represented, is delineated with decorations of flowers and foliages and is mostly painted in red colour. All the paintings are given decorative borders. The whole painting is conceived in the form of a design on a given canvas.
The themes may be classified into following categories[20]

Jagannath paintings
Vaishnav Paintings
Bhagabat paintings
Ramayana paintings
Saiva paintings
Shakta paintings
Paintings as legends
Ragachitras
Bandhachitra
Yamapati and yatripatas – (sketches of puri temple) Ganjapa playing card paintings and other socials themes on paintings.
Navagunjara[21]
Technique[edit]
 Modern-day Pattachitra depicting Kanchi Bijaya. Pattachitras were inspired by Jagannath culture in Odisha
Traditionally the painters are known as chitrakars. A patta painter's home with all the members of family is his studio. Woman members prepare the glue, the canvas and apply colours what we call the fill-in, and give the final lacquer coating. The master hand, mostly the male member, draws the initial line and gives the final finishing.
Patta paintings are done on small strips of cotton cloth. The canvas is prepared by coating the clothing with a mixture of chalk and gum made from Guar or tamarind seeds. Then it is rubbed by taking the help of two different stones and then the cloth is dried. The mixture of gum and chalk gives the cloth's surface a leathery finish on which the artists paint with vegetable, earth and stone colours.[22]
The painters do not use pencil or charcoal for the preliminary drawings. They are so expert in the line that they simply draw directly with the brush either in light red or yellow. Then the colours are filled in. The final lines are drawn and the patta is given a lacquer coating to protect it from weather, thus making the painting glossy. This process of glazing or varnishing is quite interesting. The painting is held over a fireplace so that the back of the painting is exposed to heat. On the surface of the painting fine lacquer is applied.[citation needed]

 Sankhanabhi Pata, Pattachitra map of the Puri temple, with many human and sacred figures, buildings and animals. By a painter of Puri, Odisha, ca. 1880/1910.
Colour[edit]
Pattachitras are painted in five natural colours - Hingula, Haritala, Kala, Sankha and Geru. There are typical scenes and figures like Krishna, Gopis, elephants, trees and other creatures are seen in these paintings. Krishna is always painted in blue and Gopis in light pink, purple or brown colours.[23]
The painters use vegetable and mineral colours without going for factory-made poster colours. They prepare their own colours.[24] White colour is made from the conch-shells by powdering, boiling and filtering in a very hazardous process. It requires a lot of patience. But this process gives brilliance and premanence to the hue. 'Hingula', a mineral colour, is used for red. 'Haritala', king of stone ingredients for yellow, 'Ramaraja' a sort of indigo for blue are being used. Pure lamp-black or black prepared from the burning of coconut shells are used.[25] There was no blue either cobalt or ultramarine in the earlier colour schemes. The colours used in the Patta paintings are primarily bright colours, limited to red, yellow, indigo, black and white. The brushes that are used by these 'Chitrakaras' are also indigenous and are made of hair of domestic animals. A bunch of hair tied to the end of a bamboo stick make the brush.[26]

Palm leaf Pattachitra[edit]
 Tala-pattachitra, palm leaf manuscript illustrating Labanyabati of Kabi Samrata Upendra Bhanja. Left detail, India, Odisha, late 18th century - Hanuman and Bharata at Nandigrama (verso) - 1979.21.b - Cleveland Museum of Art.
Palm leaf pattachitra which is in Oriya language known as Tala Pattachitra drawn on palm leaf. First of all palm leaves are left for becoming hard after being taken from the tree. Then these are sewn together to form like a canvas. The images are traced by using black or white ink to fill grooves etched on rows of equal-sized panels of palm leaf that are sewn together. These panels can also be easily folded like a fan and packed in a compact pile for better conservation. Often palm-leaf illustrations are more elaborated, obtaining by superimposing layers that are glued together for most of the surface, but in some areas can open like small windows to reveal a second image under the first layer.[27]



Papier-mâché mask of Goddess Kali painted in the Pattachitra idiom, Kala Bhoomi Odisha Crafts Museum, Bhubaneswar.






Wooden Ramalila masks painted in the Pattachitra style, Kala Bhoomi Odisha Crafts Museum, Bhubaneswar.






Tala Pattachitra, palm leaf painting showing the architectural plan of the Sun Temple of Konark, Odisha.






Wooden statuettes painted in the Pattachitra style, Kala Bhoomi Odisha Crafts Museum, Bhubaneswar.






Prabha of Devi Subhadra's Ratha, Puri, Odisha.






Modern wall mural of Narasimha in a street of Puri, Odisha.




Saura painting[edit]
Saura painting is a style of wall mural paintings associated with the Saura tribals of the state of Odisha in India.Saura Tribal Art in the form of Pattachitra hold religious significance for the Saura tribes.
These paintings, also called ikons (or ekons) are visually similar to Warli paintings and hold religious significance for the Sauras.

 SAURA INSPIRED ROYAL BLACK PATTACHITRA HANND-PAINTED PURE SILK SAREE
Bengal Patachitra[edit]

The Bengal Patachitra



Patachitra of Naya village






Patachitra of Naya village






Goddess Durga and her family in Medinipur Patachitra




The Bengal Patachitra refers to the painting of West Bengal and Bangladesh. It is a traditional and mythological heritage of West Bengal. The Bengal Patachitra is divided into some different aspects like Durga Pat, Chalchitra, Tribal Patachitra, Medinipur Patachitra, and Kalighat Patachitra.[28] The subject matter of Bengal Patachitra is mostly mythological, religious stories, folk lore and social. The Kalighat Patachitra, the last tradition of Bengal Patachitra is developed by Jamini Roy. The artist of the Bengal Patachitra is called Patua.[29]
Patachitra of Naya village in West Bengal is now collected in National Museum of Ethnology (henceforth MNE) in Lisbon.[30]

Origin and History[edit]
 Patua scroll on display at Archaeological activities exhibition of Bengal Patachitra
Patachitra is known for its excellent play of colour. It is a traditional folk art form of rural Bengal. There are some controversial opinions about the dates of ancient Patas. But it has been suggested on the basis of historical themes connected with the accompanied songs like Patua Sangeet. It dates back to the Pre- Pala period which is still tucked away with small villages of Midnapore, Bankura, Purulia, Howrah, Hooghly and 24 Parganas.[31]
In his book Folk Art of Bengal, author Ajitcoomar Mookerjee  has mentioned that there are some Jadu-Patuas painting of mural style in the temples of Bankura District.[32]

Theme and Style[edit]
 Performing the Patua Sangeet by a Patua during an international conference in Kolkata
There are many types of Pots like religious, secular. Religious pots encompass the story of Hindu epics like, mythology, Ramayana, Mahabharata narrating stories of Hindu gods and goddesses like Radha Krishna, Chaitanya, Kali, Shiba and the indigenous Bengali folklore of Manasha and Chandi, Behula and Lakshinder being the most popular. Secular pots depicts important news events, scandals accidents etc. such as bus accidents at Narayangarh, rural elections, the rationing system, family planning, evils of the dowry system etc. Every Patachitra has a song related to it, which the artists sing while unfurling the Patachitra. Singing pot in Bengal is called Patua Sangeet. Patua Sangeet or Poter Gan is a cultural tradition of the singing Bengal Patachitra. It is performed by Patua.[33] It is famous in the village part of West Bengal like Birbhum, Jhargram, Bardhaman and Murshidabad as a folk song of West Bengal.[10]

Aspects of painting[edit]
Bengal Patachitra painting has a different type of motive and aspects that unrolled the Bengali culture. Using the mythological epic and the natural color it is one of the individual characteristics of the Bengal Patachitra.

Chalchitra[edit]
 Chalchitra, a part of Bengal Patachitra, referred to the background Patachitra of the Durga Pratima
Chalchitra is a part of Bengal Patachitra, It referred to the Debi Chal or  Durga chala, the background of the Durga Pratima or idol.[34] Patua, the artists of Chalchitra called it as Pata Lekha, means the writing of Patachitra.[29] 300–400 years old idols of Nabadwip Shakta Rash used Chalchitra as a part of Pratima. At a time, the use of Chalchitra became fade, but now it has a great popularity.[35] Chalchitra artist of Nabadwip, Tapan Bhattacharya said-

It's good to see a lost painting coming back around.
Durga Pot[edit]
 Durga sara, an aspect of Bengal Patachitra
Durga pot or Durga sara is recognised as the worshiped patachitra. It worshiped in the Hatsarandi Sutradhar society of Birbhum district on Durga puja time. This type of patachitra is also worshiped is Katwa. Durga Pot has a hemispherical Patachitra where Patachitra of Durga is in the middle position. Ram, Sita, Shib, Nandi-Vringi, Brahma, Vishnu, Shumbha-Nishumbha are painted on this kind of Chalchitra. Krishnanager Rajrajeshwari Durga is seen to be uniquely noticed. In the middle of the Chalchitra, there is Panchanan Shib and Parvati is beside him, on one side there is Dasha-mahabidya and the other side, there is Dashabatar.[36]

Technique[edit]
The Patachitra of different districts of West Bengal are characterized by many peculiarities in colour and design. The patachitra of Manbhum, now known as Purulia can easily be distinguished by their preference for one particular shade of burnt sienna relieved by white and yellow patches and densely packed composition. The seated figures of Dasaratha and Chand Sadagar of Medinipur crowning the Ramayana and Kamale-Kamini scrolls are impressive and monumental.[37] In the scrolls of pot of Birbhum, Bankura and Burdwan preference for Indian red background usually found, the scrolls of Hooghly preferred a dark brown. The Hooghly and Manbhum 'pats' are peculiar and definitely modernistic with the abstract linear treatment.[38]

Colour[edit]
Use of natural color is one of the individual characteristics of the Bengal Patachitra. In general, blue, yellow, green, red, brown, black and white are used in the Patachitra of West Bengal. Chalk dust is used for white color, pauri for yellow color, cultivated indigo for blue, bhushakali for black and mete sindur for red color.[39]

Artists[edit]
Bengal Patua artists carry the occupational surname of 'Chitrakar'. They are concentrated in the village of Naya in Medinipur district of West Bengal. Prominent artists include Khandu and Radha Chitrakar and their children Bapi, Samir, Prabir, Laltu, Tagar, Mamoni and Laila Chitrakar. Monimala is known for her use of bold, primal colours and the development of her own iconographic style.[40]

Geographical Indication of Pattachitra[edit]
Geographical indication of Patachitra is registered under to different state of India as the style and motif of Odisha and West Bengal  Patachitra are so different. The Patachitra of Odisha is registered as Orissa Pattachitra.[1][41] The Patachitra of West Bengal is registered as Bengal Patachitra.[42][43][44]

References[edit]
 Citations 



^ a b c http://odisha.gov.in/e-magazine/Orissareview/2010/November/engpdf/46-48.pdf[bare URL PDF]

^ "Orissa Pattachitra". Retrieved 23 July 2018.

^ Bose, Nirmal Kumar. 1953. Folk religion of Bengal, part I number I (A study of the Vrata rites).C. Kar, Benoy Bose Road, Calcutta, India

^ "Patachitra: Ancient scroll painting of Bengal". Media India Group. 26 April 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2018.

^ SenGupta, pp. 13.

^ ":::::: Daricha Foundation ::::::".

^ "Patta Chitra".

^ Rahaman, Md Motiur; Hom Choudhury, Mahuya; Sengupta, Sangita (29 February 2016). "VALIDATION AND GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATION (G.I) REGISTRATION OF PATACHITRA OF WEST BENGAL- ISSUES AND CHALLENGES". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Gadon, Elinor W. (February 2000). "Indian Art Worlds in Contention: Local, Regional and National Discourses on Orissan Patta Paintings. By Helle Bundgaard. Nordic Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series, No. 80. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, 1999. 247 pp. $45.00 (cloth)". The Journal of Asian Studies. 59 (1): 192–194. doi:10.2307/2658630. ISSN 1752-0401. JSTOR 2658630. S2CID 201436927.

^ a b "Myths and Folktales in the Patachitra Art of Bengal: Tradition and Modernity - The Chitrolekha Journal on Art and Design". The Chitrolekha Journal on Art and Design. 2 August 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2018.

^ SenGupta, pp. 12.

^ "Patta Chitra".

^ "National Portal of India".

^ http://craftorissa.com/b2c/product_info.php?products_id=112[permanent dead link]

^ "Pattachitra Painting". archive.india.gov.in.

^ "Crafts of India -Patachitra - Introduction". Unnati Silks. Archived from the original on 8 February 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2018.

^ "Pattachitra Arts - Orissa | Handmade Crafts directly from Craftsmen". Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2010.

^ Mokashi, Akshata (29 January 2021). "Pattachitra: The Heritage Art of Odisha". www.livehistoryindia.com. Retrieved 31 December 2022.

^ "Indian Art » Blog Archive » Patta Chitra Paintings". indianart.in.

^ categories of Pattachitra Archived 29 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Traditional Art of Odisha : Pattachitra Painting".

^ "The meticulous process of Pattachitra paintings". Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2010.

^ "Radha, Krishna and Gopis in Pattachitra". Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2010.

^ "How to do Pattachitra". Archived from the original on 29 July 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2010.

^ natural colours used in Pattachitra Archived 29 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ colour brushes used in Pattachitra Archived 29 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Patta paintings". Archived from the original on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Palm leaf pattachitra

^ বন্দ্যোপাধ্যায়, দেবাশিস. "পটচিত্রের চাহিদা বাড়ছে নবদ্বীপের রাসে". Anandabazar Patrika (in Bengali). Retrieved 11 May 2018.

^ a b Giusti, M. and Chakraborty, U. (ed.). Immagini Storie Parole. Dialoghi di formazione coi dipinti cantati delle donne Chitrakar del West Bengal. Mantova: Universitas Studiorum, 2014, ISBN 978-88-97683-39-1

^ Ponte, Inês (13 May 2015). "Cosmopolitan impressions from a contemporary Bengali patachitra painting museum collection in Portugal". Ateliers d'Anthropologie (41). doi:10.4000/ateliers.9771. ISSN 1245-1436.

^ Roy Niranjan (1973), The Patas and Patuas of Bengal. Indian Publications Calcutta, Page number 54-55 (Annexure C,V)

^ Mookerjee Ajitcoomar (1939), Folk Art of Bengal. university of calcutta, Page number 18-19 (Annexure C.Vll)

^ Sri Ashutosh Bhattacharya. Bangiyo Loko-Sangeet Ratnakosh. Kolkata: Paschimbanga Loko Sanskriti Gobeshona Kendra. p. 1041.

^ tarapada santra (2000). Paschimbanger lokoshilpa o lokosamaj. Kolkata: Kolkata: lokosanskriti o adibasi sanskriti kendra. p. 12.

^ বন্দ্যোপাধ্যায়, দেবাশিস. "পটচিত্রের চাহিদা বাড়ছে নবদ্বীপের রাসে". Anandabazar Patrika (in Bengali). Retrieved 14 April 2018.

^ ভট্টাচার্য, বিভূতিসুন্দর. "অবক্ষয় আর অবলুপ্তির মাঝে বাংলার চালচিত্র - Anandabazar". Anandabazar Patrika (in Bengali). Retrieved 14 April 2018.

^ Craft council of West Bengal-1985-86, The Jarana Patachitra of Bengal- Mahamaya, p-112

^ D. P. Ghosh, FOLK ART OF BENGAL, Visvabharati, p-4

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 11 May 2018.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Nair, Sunita (2018). Indigenius Artists India. Mumbai: Sunita Nair. pp. 135–137. ISBN 978-93-5311-387-2.

^ "Geographical Indications of India". ipindia.nic.in. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013.

^ "Registered Gls | Geographical Indications | Intellectual Property India". www.ipindia.nic.in. Retrieved 14 May 2018.

^ "Bengal handicrafts to get new fillip with GI tags". The Hindu. 16 August 2016. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 14 May 2018.

^ Roy, Tasmayee Laha (22 August 2016). "West Bengal seeks geographical indication tag for handicrafts". The Economic Times. Retrieved 14 May 2018.


Further reading[edit]
Kossak, Steven (1997). Indian court painting, 16th-19th century. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 0-87099-783-1. (see index: p. 148-152)
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pattachitra.

Patachitra of Medinipur (Midnapore)
Past of Pattachitra
Essential Ideas on Pattachita Archived 16 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine
Pattachitra Painting
Pattachitra Photogallery
vte Culture of West BengalCuisine
Baingan bharta
Bori
Gohona Bori
Chingri malai curry
Kheer
Khichuri
Machh bhaja
Machher Jhol
Mishti doi
Nabadwip-er lal doi
Pithe
Rasogolla
Rice
Sandesh
Sorshe Ilish
Abar Khabo
DanceClassical dance
Gaudiya Nritya
Rabindra Nritya Natya
Folk dance
Alkap
Brita dance
Chhau
Dhamail
Domni
Gombhira
Kalikapatadi
Kushan dance
Raibenshe
Tusu dance
MusicCultural songs
Agamani-Vijaya
Atulprasadi Sangeet
Bishnupur Gharana
Dwijendrageeti
Nazrul Geeti
Prabhat Samgiita
Rabindra Sangeet
Shyama Sangeet
Folk songs
Baromasya Song
Baul
Bhadu Song
Bhatiali
Bhawaiya
Bolan Song
Ghatu Song
Gombhira
Hapu song
Kirtan
Patua Sangeet
Shreekrishna Kirtana
Tusu Song
Handlooms andhandicraftsHandloom
Baluchari Sari
Nakshi kantha
Kantha
Tant sari
Handicrafts
Bankura horse
Chhau Mask
Dhokra
Santiniketan Leather Goods
Shital Pati
Wooden dolls
Madurkathi
Observationsand festivals
Darjeeling Carnival
Dharmathakur
Dola jatra
Durga Puja
Guptipara Rathayatra
Jagaddhatri Puja
Joydeb-Kenduli Mela
Kali Puja
Lakshmi Puja
Mahishadal Rathayatra
Makar Sankranti
Nobanno
Poila Boishakh
Poush Mela
Rathayatra
Rathayatra of Mahesh
Shakta Rash
Sindur Khela
Arts
Alpona
Bankura horse
Manasa chali
Chalchitra
Dashabatar Cards
Durga pot
Kalighat Painting
Patachitra
Sholapith
Terracotta
Other
Barowari
Bônggabdô
Dakshin Rai
 India portal
 Category
vteState of West BengalCapital: KolkataState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of West Bengal
Animal: Fishing cat
Bird: White-throated kingfisher
Flower: Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli)
Tree: Devil's tree (Saptaparni)
Fish: Ilish
History
Gauda Kingdom
Shashanka
Pala Empire
Sena dynasty
Mallabhum
Cooch Behar State
Sher Shah Suri
Mughal Empire
Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad
East India Company
Battle of Plassey
Bengal Presidency
Great Bengal famine of 1770
Indian Rebellion of 1857
Bengali Renaissance
Bardhaman Raj
Nadia Raj
Jhargram Raj
Sovabazar Raj
Panchkot Raj
Partition of Bengal (1905)
Revolutionary movement for Indian independence
Anushilan Samiti
Jugantar
Bengal famine of 1943
Direct Action Day
Noakhali riots
Partition of Bengal (1947)
Bangladesh Liberation War
Naxalite movement
Geography
Darjeeling Himalayan hill region
Terai
North Bengal plains
Dooars
Rarh region
Sundarbans
Western plateau and high lands
Ganges Delta
Climate
Sandakphu (Highest point)
Protected areas of West Bengal
Rivers of West Bengal
Ganga
Damodar River
Brahmaputra
Teesta
Hooghly River
Khoai
Tiger Hill, Darjeeling
Siliguri Corridor
Governance
Chief Ministers
Governor
Legislative Assembly
Human Rights Commission
Political parties (All India Trinamool Congress
Communist Party (Marxist)
Indian National Congress
Bharatiya Janata Party)
Parliamentary constituencies
Assembly constituencies
CID West Bengal
Kolkata Police
Rights groups
Matua Mahasangha
Bangla Pokkho
Division and DistrictsBurdwan division
Birbhum
Hooghly
Paschim Bardhaman
Purba Bardhaman
Jalpaiguri division
Alipurduar
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Jalpaiguri
Kalimpong
Malda division
Dakshin Dinajpur
Berhampore (declared)
Malda
Murshidabad
Uttar Dinajpur
Medinipur division
Bankura
Bishnupur (declared)
Jhargram
Paschim Medinipur
Purba Medinipur
Purulia
Presidency division
Basirhat (declared)
Howrah
Ichamati (declared)
Kolkata
Nadia
North 24 Parganas
Ranaghat (declared)
Sundarbans (declared)
South 24 Parganas
Cities and towns
Alipore
Asansol
Berhampore
Balurghat
Bankura
Barasat
Bardhaman
Bishnupur
Hugli-Chuchura
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Durgapur
Haldia
Howrah
Jalpaiguri
Jaynagar Majilpur
Kalimpong
Kharagpur
Kolkata
Krishnanagar
Kurseong
Malda
Midnapore
Murshidabad
Purulia
Raiganj
Siliguri
Siuri
Tamluk
List of cities in West Bengal by population
Cities and towns by district
Culture
Bengali Renaissance
Bengali calendars
Patachitra
Chalchitra
Arts of West Bengal
Baul
Bhadu
Gombhira
Chhau dance
Cuisine
Rabindra Sangeet
Rabindra Nritya Natya
Holi
Dol Purnima
Prostitution in Kolkata
Pahela Baishakh
Durga Puja
Bhai Phonta
Raksha Bandhan
Ratha Yatra
Architecture of Bengal
Bengal temples
Bengali language
Bengali literature
Feluda
Lalmohan Ganguly
Professor Shonku
Tarini Khuro
Kakababu
Kiriti Roy
Pather Panchali (novel)
Tollywood (Bengali cinema)
Jatra
Ghosts in Bengali culture
GI product
Baluchari sari
Banglar Rosogolla
Bankura horse
Bengal Patachitra
Chhau mask
Darjeeling tea
Dhaniakhali Sari
Dhokra
Fazli (mango)
Gobindobhog
Himsagar
Jaynagarer Moa
Madurkathi
Manasa chali
Mihidana
Nakshi kantha
Sonagachi
Santiniketan Leather Goods
Sitabhog
Tulaipanji
Demographics
Bengali people
Bihari people
Economy of West Bengal
Gurkha
Adivasi
Rajbanshi
Anglo-Indian
Ethnic communities in Kolkata
List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate
Anti-Bengali sentiment in India
People
Rabindranath Tagore
Satyajit Ray
Kazi Nazrul Islam
Anil Kumar Gain
Ritwik Ghatak
Subhas Chandra Bose
Jamini Roy
Nandalal Bose
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Meghnad Saha
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee
Sarat Chandra Bose
Jnanadanandini Devi
Abanindranath Tagore
Satyendranath Tagore
Satyendranath Dutta
Ram Mohan Roy
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
Rani Rashmoni
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
Swami Vivekananda
Sarada Devi
Dwarkanath Tagore
Sukumar Ray
Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury
Lokenath Brahmachari
Michael Madhusudan Dutta
Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay
Sister Nivedita
Mother Teresa
Amartya Sen
Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay
Nihar Ranjan Gupta
Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons
vteCulture of OdishaDanceClassical
Gotipua
Mahari
Odissi
Folk
Bagha Nacha
Chadheia
Chaiti ghoda
Chhau
Chutkuchuta
Dalkhai
Danda Nata
Dhan Koela
Dhuduki
Ghumura
Jhumar
Jodi sankha
Karma
Kandhei nacha
Kathi Kandhei
Keisabadi
Nachni
Naga nrutya
Pala
Rasarkeli
Ranapa
Sambalpuri
Samprada
Laudi nata
Lankapodi
Lila
Tamasa
Pasu nrutya
Patua
Sakhi Nata
Suanga
Tribal
Desia
Gadaba
Kandha
Koya
Onra
Paraja
Saura
Music
Odissi
Khanjani
Kendara
Dhumpa
Play, theatre andpuppetryPlay and theatre
Bharata Lila
Dasakathia
Dhanu Jatra
Jatra
Prahallada Nataka
Puppetry
Ravana chhaya
Sakhi kandhei
Wedding
Odia Hindu wedding
Festivals
Bali Jatra
Boita Bandana
Deepabali
Dola Jatra
Durga Puja
Nuakhai
Gamha Purnima
Kumar Purnima
Makar Sankranti
Manabasa Gurubara
Pana Sankranti (Maha Vishuba Sankranti)
Pousha Purnima
Prathamastami
Ratha Jatra
Raja
Samba Dashami
Savitri Brata
Sitalsasthi
Snana Jatra
Martial arts
Paika akhada
Handlooms
Baleswari bandha
Berhampuri
Bomkai (Sonepuri)
Dhalapathar
Gopalpur Tussar
Habaspuri
Kotpad
Ikat
Pasapali
Sambalpuri
Arts andHandicraftsArts
Pattachitra
Jhoti chita
Saura painting
Idital
Handicrafts
Chandua
Tarakasi
Ganjapa
Clay
Stoneworks
Wooden crafts
Bronze & Bell metal works
Dhokra
Architecture
Kalinga architecture
Deula
Calendar (Panjika)
Odia calendar
Anka year
 Category
vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal
Authority control: National 
Israel
United States





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pattachitra&oldid=1145223737"
Categories: Geographical indications in West BengalArts of OdishaGeographical indications in OdishaCulture of OdishaSchools of Indian paintingCulture of West BengalIndian folk artHidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citationsArticles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citationsCS1 errors: missing periodicalAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2018Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 Bengali-language sources (bn)CS1 maint: archived copy as titleArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from March 2022All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2020All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2019Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiers






 This page was last edited on 17 March 2023, at 22:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





