



Gundicha Temple - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Temple







2The Rath Yatra







3Ratha Yatra rituals







4Legends







5References













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Gundicha Temple




7 languages



বাংলাहिन्दीمصرىଓଡ଼ିଆРусскийதமிழ்తెలుగు
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Gundicha Templeଗୁଣ୍ଡିଚା ମନ୍ଦିରGundicha TempleReligionAffiliationHinduismDistrictPuriDeityJagannathFestivalsRath YatraGoverning bodyShri Jagannath Temple Administration, PuriLocationLocationBadashankhaStateOdishaCountryIndiaGundicha TempleGeographic coordinates19°49′00.9″N 85°50′25.3″E﻿ / ﻿19.816917°N 85.840361°E﻿ / 19.816917; 85.840361Coordinates: 19°49′00.9″N 85°50′25.3″E﻿ / ﻿19.816917°N 85.840361°E﻿ / 19.816917; 85.840361Temple(s)OneWebsitehttp://www.jagannath.nic.in/
Part of a series onVaishnavism
Supreme deity
Vishnu / Krishna / Rama

Important deities
Dashavatara
Matsya
Kurma
Varaha
Narasimha
Vamana
Parasurama
Rama
Balarama
Krishna
Buddha
Kalki
Other forms
Dhanvantari
Guruvayurappan
Hayagriva
Jagannath
Mohini
Nara-Narayana
Prithu
Shrinathji
Venkateshvara
Vithoba
Consorts
Lakshmi
Bhūmi
Sita
Radha
Rukmini
Alamelu
Related
Garuda
Hanuman
Shesha
Shasta

Holy scriptures
Vedas
Upanishads
Agamas
Brahma Sutras
Bhagavad Gita
Mahabharata
Ramayana
Harivamsa
Divya Prabandha
Gita Govinda
Puranas
Vishnu
Bhagavata
Naradiya
Garuda
Padma
Agni

Sampradayas
Sri (Vishishtadvaita)
Rudra (Shuddhadvaita)
Kumara (Dvaitadvaita)
Brahma (Tattvavada or (Dvaita)), Acintyabhedabheda)
Others
Ekasarana Dharma
Mahanubhava
Pranami
Radha Vallabha
Ramsnehi
Sant Mat
Swaminarayan
Vaishnava-Sahajiya
Warkari

Teachers—acharyas
Chaitanya
Chakradhara
Dadu Dayal
Harivansh
Jayatirtha
Jiva Goswami
Jñāneśvara
Kabir
Madhavdev
Madhvacharya
Manavala Mamunigal
Namadeva
Nammalvar
Nathamuni
Nimbarka
Padmanabha Tirtha
Pillai Lokacharya
Purandara Dasa
Raghuttama Tirtha
Raghavendra Tirtha
Ram Charan
Ramananda
Ramanuja
Ravidas
Satyanatha Tirtha
Satyabhinava Tirtha
Satyabodha Tirtha
Satyadharma Tirtha
Satyadhyana Tirtha
Samarth Ramdas
Sankardev
Swaminarayan
Sripadaraja
Tukaram
Tulsidas
Vallabha
Vedanta Desika
Vidyapati
Vishnuswami
Vyasatirtha
Vadiraja Tirtha
Yamunacharya

Related traditions
Bhagavatism
Vaikhanasas
Pancharatra
Tenkalai
Vadakalai
Munitraya
Krishnaism
Jagannathism
Haridasa
Sahajiya
Baul
Pushtimarg
Gaudiya
ISKCON
Ramanandi
Kapadi
Balmiki
Kabir panth
Dadu panth
Mahanam
vte
Gundicha Temple  (Odia: ଗୁଣ୍ଡିଚା ମନ୍ଦିର), is a Hindu temple, situated in the temple town of Puri in the state of Odisha, India. It is significant for being the destination of the celebrated annual Rath Yatra of Puri. While it remains vacant most of the year, the temple is occupied by images of the deities of Jagannath, his brother Balabhadra and sister Subhadra for seven complete days (total 9 days including the start and concluding day of Ratha Yatra) every year during the annual Rath Yatra festival.


Temple[edit]
Known as the Garden House of Jagannath, the Gundicha temple stands in the centre of a beautiful garden, surrounded by compound walls on all sides. It lies at a distance of about 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) from the Shrimandira, the main temple of Jagannath. The two temples are located at the two ends of the Bada Danda (Grand Avenue) which is the pathway for the Rath Yatra.
The temple is built using light-grey sandstone and architecturally, it exemplifies typical Kalinga temple architecture[1] in the Deula style. The complex comprises four components: vimana (tower structure containing the sanctum), jagamohana (assembly hall), nata-mandapa (festival hall) and bhoga-mandapa (hall of offerings). There is also a kitchen connected by a small passage.[2] The temple is set within a garden,[1] and is known as "God's Summer Garden Retreat" or garden house of Jagannath.[3] The entire complex, including garden, is surrounded by a wall.
The sanctum features a plain raised platform (4 feet (1.2 m) high and 19 feet (5.8 m) long) made of chlorite called Ratnavedi, where the deities are placed during the annual festivities.[2] The temple has two gates. The western gate is the main temple gate, through which the deities enter the temple during Ratha Yatra. The eastern gate, known as Nakachana gate, is used for the departure of the deities.[2]
Except for the 9-day Rath Yatra when Jagannath is worshipped in Gundicha temple, the temple remains empty the rest of the year. Tourists can visit the temple after paying an entry fee. Foreigners (prohibited entry in the main temple) are allowed inside this temple during this period.[4] The temple is under the Jagannath Temple Administration, Puri - the governing body of the main temple. A small band of servitors maintain the temple.[2]

The Rath Yatra[edit]
The Rath Yatra starts on the second lunar day (dwitiya) the bright fortnight (shukla paksha) of the Hindu month of Ashadha.[5] One day before the Ratha Yatra, the Gundicha Temple is religiously cleansed for housing the gods.[6][7]
On the first day of the yatra, the deities are transported in chariots from the main temple to Gundicha temple. This is the famous Rath Yatra or Chariot Festival of Jagannath Puri. The three deities are transported in three magnificent chariots, drawn by the numerous devotees gathered there. The three chariots involved in the chariot procession are: one for each deity with central chariot called the Nandighosha, carrying the main deity of Jagannath and the second chariot known as Taladhwaja carrying Balabhadra, and the third chariot called the Darpadalana carrying Subhadra. The procession progresses down the 3 km long "Bada Danda" (long avenue) and reaches the gates of the Gundicha temple before nightfall. The deities remain in the chariots on the first day and enter the Gundicha Temple on the second day. They reside at the Gundicha temple for the subsequent seven days.[6][8]

Ratha Yatra rituals[edit]
Worship
A particular feature in the worship of the deities at Gundicha Temple is that Brahmin temple servants offer the puja instead of daitas, the traditional non-Brahmin servitors of Jagannath who are excluded from worship. Though devadasis generally function as agents of Lakshmi, they offer worship in the Gundicha Temple in the same manner as in the main temple, while Lakshmi is left behind in a storeroom in the main temple. This connotes a different context to the role of the devadasis in the Gundicha Temple. Another unusual feature is that the images are smeared with larger quantities of sandalwood paste,  twice a day, as a "cooling agent" (as is commonly done to the goddess Gundicha).[9] Every day of their stay in the temple, the deities are decorated with new dresses.[7]

Hera Panchami
 Nandighosha, the Chariot of Jagannath leaves the main temple.
A major ceremony celebrated in the Gundicha Temple during the Rath Yatra is on the Panchami (5th day of the Ratha Yatra) known as Hera Panchami (Hera means "to see').[10] This ceremony is attended by a very large number of devotees, who visit the Ratha Yatra Festival. While Jagannath visits Gundicha temple, his wife Lakshmi is left behind in the main temple of Puri. On Hera Panchami, the furious goddess Lakshmi arrives, in the form of the image of Subarna Mahalakshmi, at the Gundicha Temple. She is formally carried in a palanquin with much fan fare and welcomed and worshipped by the priests of Gundicha Temple, who take her to the sanctum to meet Jagannath. The husband and wife seat face-to-face on the porch in the sanctum of the Gundicha Temple; on this occasion devotees flock to the temple to have the darshan (see the holy images). Lakshmi requests him to return home and Jagannath gives his consent by offering her agyan mala (a garland of consent), which the goddess accepts and takes with her while return to the main temple in the evening. Before returning to the temple, to vent her anger at being left out of the vacation, Lakshmi orders one of her attendants to damage a part of Jagannath's chariot, the Nandighosha. This ritual is known as the Ratha Bhanga (the breaking of the chariot).[10][11] This is followed by her hiding behind a tamarind tree outside the Gundicha Temple. After some time, she escapes to her home temple in secrecy, through a separate path way known as Hera Gohri Lane, as she fears the repercussions of her angry act.[10][11]

Dakshina Moda
The ceremony of Dakshina Moda (turning south) is observed on the day after Hera Panchami, that is, the sixth day of the Rath Yatra. The chariots of the deities are parked outside the temple, facing the main temple gate (western gate). In preparation for the return journey, the Bahuda Yatra, the chariots are turned to face towards the main temple in the southern direction and are parked near the Nakachana gate (eastern gate) of the Gundicha Temple through which the deities leave the temple. It is said the demon-king of Lanka, Vibhishana got darshan of Jagannath from far away Lanka on this day. Devotees believe one can attain salvation by witnessing this ceremony.[12]

Rasa Lila
Dakshina Moda, marks the beginning of the three-day Rasa Lila of Jagannath.[12] Rasa lila is described in Hindu texts like the Bhagavata Purana and Gita Govinda as a night in Vrindavan when Krishna danced with his gopi-consort Radha and other gopis. The image of  Jagannath is taken to the Rasa mandapa (a temple hall) of the Gundicha Temple where hymns from the Gita Govinda are sung for the last 3 days of his stay in the temple. During the Rasa Lila, the interaction between Jagannath-Krishna and the gopis is enacted through the Gita Govinda verses. In the olden days, Devadasis sang the verses, which are now sung by the temple servitors. Vaishnavas thus consider Gundicha Temple as Vrindavan during Jagannath's stay there.[13]

Sandhya Darshan and Mahaprasad
As per tradition, during Jagannath's stay in Gundicha temple, the kitchens of the main temple stop preparing Mahaprasad (food offered to deity and given to a devotee as the deity's blessing). The Mahaprasad consists of rice, dal, vegetables etc. The kitchens of the Gundicha temple are repaired and food is cooked there to offer to Jagannath. The day of Sandhya Darshan, (evening prayers) the second last day of the festival, is considered the most important day to have darshan of Jagannath. On this day, as thousands of devotees throng the temple to have darshan of Jagannath and partake of Mahaprasad.[14][15]

Bahuda Yatra
 The Nakachana Gate of the Gundicha Temple
The return journey of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra to the main temple, after spending seven days in the Gundicha temple, is known as the Bahuda Yatra.[16] The images of the deities are brought out of the Gundicha temple through the Nakachana Gate during the Pahandi ceremony, to the accompaniment of the beats of cymbals and gongs and the sound of conches being blown.[17] Odissi and Gotipua dancers serenade to the tune of  music in front of the chariots, and martial artists perform banati, a traditional martial art in front of the deities. The deities are taken in the same chariots in which they arrive, pulled by devotees back to the main temple. It is considered auspicious to get a glimpse of the deities on their chariots.[16]

Legends[edit]
 The Main Gate of the Gundicha Temple
There are many legends linked to the temple and the annual seven-day stay of the central icons of Jagannath and his siblings during the Ratha Yatra.
A legend links the temple to Gundicha, the queen of Indradyumna (the legendary builder of the main temple) - after whom the Gundicha Temple is named. Gundicha had a peep at the divine image of Jagannath being created by the celestial architect Vishwakarma. Impressed by the image, she insisted on her husband building the temple for the deity and starting the Ratha Yatra. Another variant suggests that Jagannath was pleased with her temple and promised to visit her house, now the Gundicha Temple.[1][2][18]
As per another legend, when Jagannath (identified with the god Krishna) goes to stay for seven days in the Gundicha Temple, he intentionally leaves behind his consort Lakshmi locked up in a store room in the main Jagannath temple. While in the Gundicha temple, he is exclusively taken care by his gopis (cow-herding girls) led by  his gopi-lover Radha like Krishna in Vrindavan. The gopis are symbolized by the temple devadasis on this occasion.  When Jagannatha returns to his main temple after his amorous dalliance, Lakshmi meets him at the main temple gate and sprinkles some magical powder on him, which makes him forget about his escapade in the Gundicha Temple, and she is immediately reunited with her husband in blissful love.[18]
One more legend relates the temple's name Gundicha to a local goddess Gundicha, akin to Durga, worshipped to cure smallpox. Gundi in Oriya means smallpox,  Gundicha is considered Krishna-Jagannath's aunt, which he visits with his siblings annually.[2]
Another legend is about the mysterious disappearance of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (an incarnation of Krishna according to the Bhavishya Purana). He established Gaudiya Vaishnavism and also known to have composed the Jagannath Astakam. He lived in Puri for many years and sang bhajans (devotional songs) and led sankirtan processions in front of Jagannath during his Chandan Yatra and Ratha Yatra, along with many devotees. It is also said that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu used to go into a rapturous mood watching the god's love play and dance with joy and also fainted many times due to emotion. Daily, he prayed to Jagannath, standing behind the garudastamba (Pillar of Garuda) with tears flowing down his eyes. With permission of the king, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu once undertook the task of cleaning the Gundicha temple premises a day before the Ratha yatra (this tradition is followed even to this day by the followers of the Gaudiya Vaishnavism). It is mentioned that once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, unnoticed by his attendants, walked towards the Gundicha Temple and was last seen entering the Manikotha, thereafter he was never seen again. This disappearance has remained an unexplained mystery as none of the books written on him have recorded this event. It is believed that he merged with Jagannath at the temple.[18]

References[edit]

^ a b c "Tourism in Sonepur".

^ a b c d e f Shree Kshestra

^ Sehgal, Sunil (1999). Encyclopaedia of Hinduism, Volume 4. Sarup & Sons. p. 1077. ISBN 9788176250641. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ Panda, Namita (22 June 2012). "Ready for the Trinity". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ Panda, Swarnaprava (July 2006). "Rathayatra of Puri" (PDF). Orissa Review: 25–27. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b "The Car Festival of Lord Jagannath, Unique in many respect" (PDF). Official Website of Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b Sharma, Dr. Shiv (2008). O India - A Travel Guide. Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd. p. 327. ISBN 9788128400674. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ details of the temple

^ Carman, John B.; Marglin, Frédérique Apffel (1985). Purity and Auspiciousness in Indian Society. BRILL. p. 77. ISBN 9789004077898.

^ a b c "Lakshmi anger rocks Gundicha temple". The Telegraph. June 26, 2012. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b Kanungo, Siddharth. "The car festival of Lord Jagannath unique in many respect" (PDF). Srimandir: 61. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b "Holiday high at aunt's abode". The Telegraph. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ Ghosh, Pika (2005). Temple To Love: Architecture And Devotion In Seventeenth-Century Bengal. Indiana University Press. p. 49. ISBN 0253344875.

^ Mohanty, Subhashish (7 July 2011). "Lord's food served at Gundicha". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ "Sandhya darshan: Lakhs throng Gundicha temple". The New Indian Express. 29 June 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b "Lords Leave Sri Gundicha Temple As Chariots Start Rolling". Public Trust of India. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ Mohapatra, Debabrata (29 June 2012). "Bahuda Yatra euphoria smothers terror threat". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 26 May 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2012.

^ a b c Ghosh, Pika (2005). Temple To Love: Architecture And Devotion In Seventeenth-Century Bengal. Indiana University Press. pp. 49–50. ISBN 9780253344878.


vteJagannath worshipDeities
Jagannath
Balabhadra
Subhadra
Sudarshana Chakra
TemplesOdisha
Puri
Gundicha
Baripada
Gunupur
Koraput
Nayagarh
Bhubaneswar
Kendrapara
Chhatia Bata
Dharakote
Patali Srikhetra
Barbil
Rest of India
Agartala
Ahmedabad
Alwar
Bangalore
Chennai
Delhi
Digha
Hajo
Hyderabad
Ranchi
Medinipur
Mahesh
Abroad
Comilla
Dhamrai
Pabna
South Africa
Sialkot
Festivals
Chandan Yatra
Dola Yatra
Panchaka
Nabakalebara
2015
Rath Yatra
Snana Yatra
Besha
Suna Besha
Texts
Bhagavata Purana
Brahma Purana
Gita Govinda
Kapila Purana
Madala Panji
Skanda Purana
Dahuka boli
Devotees
Indradyumna
Jayadeva
Sarala Dasa
Balarama Dasa
Atibadi Jagannatha Dasa
Jasobanta Dasa
Ananta Dasa
Achyutananda
Salabega
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
Madhavi Pattanayak
Dinakrushna Das
Banamali Dasa
Upendra Bhanja
Kabisurjya Baladeba Ratha
Gopalakrusna Pattanayaka
See also
Odissi music
Gahana Vije
Mahaprasad
Nilachal
Nila Chakra
Neela Madhava
Samkha Kshetra
Shri Jagannath Temple Act, 1955
ISKCON

 Category

vteHindu temples in OdishaBhubaneswarShiva temples
Aisanyesvara Siva Temple
Akhadachandi Temple
Astasambhu Temples
Bhima Kunda
Bhringesvara Siva Temple
Bhrukutesvar Siva Temple
Brahmeswara Temple
Byamokesvara Temple
Chakreshvari Siva Temple
Champakesvara Siva Temple
Chandrasekhara Mahadeva Temple
Chintamanisvara Siva Temple
Devasabha Temple
Dishisvara Siva Temple
Gangesvara Siva Temple
Gosagaresvar Siva Temple
Jaleswar Siva Temple Precinct
Kalika Siva Temple
Kapilesvara Siva Temple
Kedareswar Temple
Labesvara Siva Temple
Ladu Baba Temple
Lakhesvara Siva Temple
Lingaraj Temple
Madneswar Siva Temple
Mangalesvara Siva Temple
Manibhadresvara Temple - II
Mukteswar Temple
Nagesvara Temple, Bhubaneswar
Pabaneswara Temple
Papanasini Siva Temple
Parsurameswar Temple
Purvesvara Siva Temple
Rajarani Temple
Rameshwar Deula
Sarvatresvara Siva Temple
Siddhesvara Siva Temple
Subarnesvara Siva Temple
Suka Temple
Sukutesvara Temple
Svapnesvara Siva Temple
Talesvara Siva Temple
Tirthesvara Siva Temple
Uttaresvara Siva Temple
Vaital Deula
Yameshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Ananta Vasudeva Temple
Bharati Matha
Gandhi Garabadu Precinct Vishnu Temple
Ram Mandir, Bhubaneswar
Vishnu Temple, Bhubaneswar
Shakti temples
Chausathi Jogini Temple
Parvati Temple, Odisha
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Bindusagar
Hanuman Temple, Kedara-Gouri
Sivatirtha Matha
Cuttack districtShiva temples
Chateshwar Temple
Dhabaleswar
Simhanath Temple
Vishnu temples
Madhava Temple
Shakti temples
Bhattarika Temple
Charchika Temple
Cuttack Chandi Temple
Durga Temple, Baideshwar
Durga Temple, Motia
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Niali
Puri districtShiva temples
Beleswar Temple
Lokanatha Temple
Markandeshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Alarnatha Mandira
Chakra Narasimha Temple
Gundicha Temple
Jagannath Temple, Puri
Narasimha Temple, Puri
Sakshigopal Temple
Shakti temples
Bata Mangala Temple
Kakatpur Mangala Temple
Mausi Maa Temple
Ramachandi Temple
Varahi Deula, Chaurasi
Vimala Temple
Sun temples
Konark Sun Temple
Other temples
Govardhana matha
Emar Matha
Western OdishaShiva temples
Kosaleswara temple
Leaning Temple of Huma
Vishnu temples
Nrusinghanath Temple
Patali Srikhetra
Shakti temples
Lankeswari Temple
Samaleswari Temple
Sureswari temple
Other temples
Harishankar Temple
Sasisena Temple
Rayagada districtShiva temples
Bhimashankar
Chatikona
Nilakantheswar Temple
Pataleswar
Vishnu temples
Jagannath Temple, Gunupur
Jagannath Temple, Rayagada
Laxminarayan temple, Therubali
Shakti temples
Maa Markama Temple
Majhighariani Temple
OtherShiva temples
Ajaikapada Bhairava Temple
Akhandalamani Temple
Annakoteshvara Temple
Bhuvaneshwar Temple, Boudh
Chandaneswar
Gupteswar Cave
Godhaneswar temple
Indralath Temple
Kapilash Temple
Murga Mahadeva Shrine
Nilakantheswar Temple
Panchalingeshwar
Sekhareswar Temple
Vishnu temples
Anantasaayi Vishnu Temple
Ananta Shayana
Anantashayana Vishnu
Baladevjew Temple
Chhatia Bata
Jagannath Temple, Baripada
Jagannath Temple, Dharakote
Jagannath Temple, Koraput
Jagannath Temple, Nayagarh
Khirachora Gopinatha Temple
Lakhmi Varaha Temple
Narayana Gosain Temple
Nilamadhav Temple
Odogaon Raghunath Temple
Varahanatha Temple
Shakti temples
Bhadrakali Temple, Aharapada
Bhagabati Temple, Banapur
Biraja Temple
Ghanteswari Temple
Goddess Maheshwari
Kalijai
Kanaka Durga, Raulapalli
Kichakeshwari Temple
Maa Barunei Temple
Maa Tarini Temple, Ghatgaon
Maa Ugra Tara
Maa Markama Temple
Mahishamardini Temple
Majhighariani Temple
Manikeshwari Temple
Marichi temple
Mausimaa Temple
Metakani Temple
Narayani Temple
Saptamatruka Temple
Sarala Temple
Siddha Bhairavi
Taratarini Temple
Upper Bagh Devi Temple
Sun temples
Biranchinarayan Temple, Buguda
Biranchinarayan Temple, Palia
Ganesha temples
Budha Ganesha Temple
Mahavinayak Temple
Siddha Vinayaka
Other temples
Bhandara Ghara Shrine
Hanuman Vatika
Harihara Deula
Joranda Gadhi

Shakti temples in Odisha
Shiva temples in Odisha
Temples in Bhubaneswar

About Nabakalebara puri 2015
Odisha Cultures
Temples in Odisha
Odisha Festivals





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gundicha_Temple&oldid=1139533144"
Categories: Hindu temples in PuriTemples dedicated to JagannathHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Odia-language text






 This page was last edited on 15 February 2023, at 16:36 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





