



Jagannath Temple, Puri - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History







2Deities


				Toggle Deities subsection
			




2.1Legends





2.1.1Legend surrounding the Temple origin











3Invasions and desecrations of the Temple







4Entry and Darshan







5Cultural integrity


				Toggle Cultural integrity subsection
			




5.1Acharyas and Jagannatha Puri







5.2Char Dham









6Structure


				Toggle Structure subsection
			




6.1Nila Chakra







6.2The Singhadwara







6.3Other entrances







6.4Minor temples







6.5The Mandapas









7Daily food offerings







8Rosaghara







9Festivals


				Toggle Festivals subsection
			




9.1Chandan Yatra







9.2Snnana Yatra







9.3Anavasara or Anasara







9.4Rath Yatra at Puri







9.5Niladri Bije







9.6Gupta Gundicha







9.7Nabakalebara









10Management







11Security







12See also







13References


				Toggle References subsection
			




13.1Bibliography









14External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Jagannath Temple, Puri




26 languages



বাংলাБеларускаяभोजपुरीDeutschEspañolFrançaisहिन्दीItalianoಕನ್ನಡमैथिलीമലയാളംमराठीمصرىनेपालीଓଡ଼ିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPolskiRomânăРусскийதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยУкраїнськаاردو中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Hindu temple dedicated to Jagannath at Puri, Odisha, India
"Jagannath Temple" redirects here. For other uses, see Jagannath Temple (disambiguation).


This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Jagannath Temple, Puri" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Jagannath Temple, Puriଜଗନ୍ନାଥ ପୁରୀ (Odia)ReligionAffiliationHinduismDistrictPuriDeityJagannathFestivalsRatha YatraChandan YatraSnana YatraNabakalebaraGoverning bodyShree Jagannath Temple Office, Puri, Odisha, Shree Jagannath Temple Managing Committee, PuriLocationLocationPuriStateOdishaCountryIndiaLocation in OdishaGeographic coordinates19°48′17″N 85°49′6″E﻿ / ﻿19.80472°N 85.81833°E﻿ / 19.80472; 85.81833Coordinates: 19°48′17″N 85°49′6″E﻿ / ﻿19.80472°N 85.81833°E﻿ / 19.80472; 85.81833ArchitectureTypeKalinga ArchitectureCreatorIndradyumnaCompleted1161 CE[citation needed]SpecificationsTemple(s)31Elevation65 m (213 ft)Websitewww.shreejagannatha.in 
Char DhamvtePuriRameswaramDwarakaBadrinath
Part of a series onVaishnavism
Supreme deity
Vishnu / Krishna / Rama

Important deities
Dashavatara
Matsya
Kurma
Varaha
Narasimha
Vamana
Parasurama
Rama
Balarama
Krishna
Buddha
Kalki
Other forms
Dhanvantari
Guruvayurappan
Hayagriva
Jagannath
Mohini
Nara-Narayana
Prithu
Shrinathji
Venkateshvara
Vithoba
Consorts
Lakshmi
Bhūmi
Sita
Radha
Rukmini
Alamelu
Related
Garuda
Hanuman
Shesha
Shasta

Holy scriptures
Vedas
Upanishads
Agamas
Brahma Sutras
Bhagavad Gita
Mahabharata
Ramayana
Harivamsa
Divya Prabandha
Gita Govinda
Puranas
Vishnu
Bhagavata
Naradiya
Garuda
Padma
Agni

Sampradayas
Sri (Vishishtadvaita)
Rudra (Shuddhadvaita)
Kumara (Dvaitadvaita)
Brahma (Tattvavada or (Dvaita)), Acintyabhedabheda)
Others
Ekasarana Dharma
Mahanubhava
Pranami
Radha Vallabha
Ramsnehi
Sant Mat
Swaminarayan
Vaishnava-Sahajiya
Warkari

Teachers—acharyas
Chaitanya
Chakradhara
Dadu Dayal
Harivansh
Jayatirtha
Jiva Goswami
Jñāneśvara
Kabir
Madhavdev
Madhvacharya
Manavala Mamunigal
Namadeva
Nammalvar
Nathamuni
Nimbarka
Padmanabha Tirtha
Pillai Lokacharya
Purandara Dasa
Raghuttama Tirtha
Raghavendra Tirtha
Ram Charan
Ramananda
Ramanuja
Ravidas
Satyanatha Tirtha
Satyabhinava Tirtha
Satyabodha Tirtha
Satyadharma Tirtha
Satyadhyana Tirtha
Samarth Ramdas
Sankardev
Swaminarayan
Sripadaraja
Tukaram
Tulsidas
Vallabha
Vedanta Desika
Vidyapati
Vishnuswami
Vyasatirtha
Vadiraja Tirtha
Yamunacharya

Related traditions
Bhagavatism
Vaikhanasas
Pancharatra
Tenkalai
Vadakalai
Munitraya
Krishnaism
Jagannathism
Haridasa
Sahajiya
Baul
Pushtimarg
Gaudiya
ISKCON
Ramanandi
Kapadi
Balmiki
Kabir panth
Dadu panth
Mahanam
vte
The Jagannath Temple is an important Hindu temple dedicated to Jagannath, a form of Vishnu – one of the trinity of supreme divinity in Hinduism. Puri is in the state of Odisha, on the eastern coast of India. The Somavamsa king Indradyumna of Abanti has built the main temple of Lord Jagannath at Puri. The present temple was rebuilt from the tenth century onwards, on the site of pre-existing temples in the compound but not the main Jagannatha temple, and begun by Anantavarman Chodaganga, the first king of the Eastern Ganga dynasty.[1] many rumors are spread about the temple but there is no solid proof of it.[clarification needed] [2]
The Puri temple is famous for its annual Ratha Yatra, or chariot festival, in which the three principal deities are pulled on huge and elaborately decorated temple cars. Unlike the stone and metal icons found in most Hindu temples, the image of Jagannath is made of wood and is ceremoniously replaced every twelve or 19 years by an exact replica.[3] It is one of the Char Dham pilgrimage sites.The puri temple is also famous because many legends believe that Lord Krishna’s heart was placed there and the material that it is made from damages the heart so they have to change it every twelve years.
The temple is sacred to all Hindus, and especially in those of the Vaishnava traditions. Many great Vaishnava saints, such as Ramanujacharya, Madhvacharya, Nimbarkacharya, Vallabhacharya and Ramananda were closely associated with the temple.[4][5] Ramanuja established the Emar Mutt near the temple and Adi Shankaracharya established the Govardhan Math, which is the seat of one of the four Shankaracharyas. It is also of particular significance to the followers of Gaudiya Vaishnavism, whose founder, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, was attracted to the deity, Jagannath, and lived in Puri for many years.[6][7]


History[edit]
See also: Jagannath § Origins
The temple was rebuilt by the Ganga dynasty king Anantavarman Chodaganga in the 10th century CE, as suggested by the Kendupatna copper-plate inscription of his descendant Narasimhadeva II.[8] Anantavarman was originally a Shaivite, and became a Vaishnavite sometime after he conquered the Utkala region (in which the temple is located) in 1112 CE. A 1134–1135 CE inscription records his donation to the temple. Therefore, the temple construction must have started sometime after 1112 CE.[9]

 Drawing of Puri Temple from the book L'Inde des rajahs : voyage dans l'Inde centrale et dans les présidences de Bombay et de Bengale, 1877
According to a story in the temple chronicles, it was founded by Anangabhima-deva II: different chronicles variously mention the year of construction as 1196, 1197, 1205, 1216, or 1226.[10] This suggests that the temple's construction was completed or that the temple was renovated during the reign of Anantavarman's son Anangabhima.[11] The temple complex was further developed during the reigns of the subsequent kings, including those of the Ganga dynasty and the Gajapati dynasty.[12]

Deities[edit]
Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra are a trio of deities worshipped at the temple. The inner sanctum of the temple contains the deities of them carved from sacred neem logs known as daru sitting on the bejewelled platform or ratnabedi, along with deities of Sudarshana Chakra, Madanmohan, Sridevi and Vishwadhatri.[13] The deities are adorned with different clothing and jewels according to the season. Worship of these deities pre-dates the building of the temple and may have originated in an ancient tribal shrine.[14]

Legends[edit]
 Statue of Aruna the charioteer of the Sun God on top of the Aruna Stambha in front of the Singhadwara.
According to legend, the construction of the first Jagannath temple was commissioned by King Indradyumna, son of Bharata and Sunanda, and a Malava king, mentioned in the Mahabharata and the Puranas.[15]
The legendary account as found in the Skanda Purana, Brahma Purana and other Puranas and later Odia works state that Jagannath was originally worshipped as Nilamadhava by a savara king (tribal chief) named Vishvavasu. Having heard about the deity, King Indradyumna sent a Brahmin priest, Vidyapati to locate the deity, who was worshipped secretly in a dense forest by Vishvavasu. Vidyapati tried his best but could not locate the place. But at last he managed to marry Vishvavasu's daughter Lalita. At repeated request of Vidyapti, Vishvavasu took his son-in-law blind folded to a cave where Nilamadhava was worshipped.[16]
Vidyapati was very intelligent. He dropped mustard seeds on the ground on the way. The seeds germinated after a few days, which enabled him to find out the cave later on. On hearing from him, King Indradyumna proceeded immediately to Odra desha (Odisha) on a pilgrimage to see and worship the Deity. But the deity had disappeared. The king was disappointed. The Deity was hidden in sand. The king was determined not to return without having a darshan of the deity and observed fast unto death at Nilachala, Then a celestial voice cried Thou shalt see him.  Afterward, the king performed a horse sacrifice and built a magnificent temple for Vishnu. Narasimha Murti brought by Narada was installed in the temple. During sleep, the king had a vision of Jagannath. Also an astral voice directed him to receive the fragrant tree on the seashore and make deities out of it. Accordingly, the king got the image of Jagannath, Balabhadra, Subhadra and the Sudarshana Chakra made out of the wood of the divine tree and installed them in the temple.[citation needed]
Indradyumna's prayer to Brahma
King Indradyumna put up for Jagannath the tallest monument of the world. It was 1,000 cubits high. He invited Brahma, the cosmic creator, consecrate the temple and the images.[17] Brahma came all the way from Heaven for this purpose. Seeing the temple he was immensely pleased with him. Brahma asked Indradyumna as to in what way can he (Brahma) fulfill the king's desire, since was very much pleased with him for his having put the most beautiful Temple for deityVishnu. With folded hands, Indradyumna said, "My deity, if you are really pleased with me, kindly bless me with one thing, and it is that I should be issueless and that I should be the last member of my family." In case anybody left alive after him, he would only take pride as the owner of the temple and would not work for the society.[citation needed]

Legend surrounding the Temple origin[edit]
The traditional story concerning the origins of the Jagannath temple is that here the original image of Jagannath (a deity form of Vishnu) at the end of Dvapara yuga manifested near a banyan tree, near seashore in the form of an Indranila mani or the Blue Jewel.  It was so dazzling that it could grant instant moksha, so the God Dharma or Yama wanted to hide it in the earth and was successful. In Kali Yuga King Indradyumna of Malwa wanted to find that mysterious image and to do so he performed harsh penance to obtain his goal. Vishnu then instructed him to go to the Puri seashore and find a floating log to make an image from its trunk.[citation needed]
The King found the log of wood. He did a yajna from which God Yajna Nrisimha appeared and instructed that Narayana should be made as fourfold expansion, i.e. Paramatma as Vasudeva, his Vyuha as Samkarshana, Yogamaya as Subhadra, and his Vibhava as Sudarsana. Vishwakarma appeared in the form of an artisan and prepared images of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra from the tree.[18]
When this log, radiant with light was seen floating in the sea, Narada told the king to make three deities out of it and place them in a pavilion. Indradyumna got Visvakarma, the architect of Gods, to build a magnificent temple to house the deities, and Vishnu himself appeared in the guise of a carpenter to make the deities on condition that he was to be left undisturbed until he finished the work.[citation needed]
But just after two weeks, the Queen became very anxious. She took the carpenter to be dead as no sound came from the temple. Therefore, she requested the king to open the door. Thus, they went to see Vishnu at work at which the latter abandoned his work leaving the deities unfinished. The deity was devoid of any hands. But a divine voice told Indradyumana to install them in the temple. It has also been widely believed that in spite of the deity being without hands, it can watch over the world and be its lord. Thus the idiom.[citation needed]

 The Ratha Yatra in Puri in modern times showing the three chariots of the deities with the Temple in the background
Invasions and desecrations of the Temple[edit]
The temple annals, the Madala Panji records that the Jagannath temple at Puri has been invaded and plundered eighteen times.[19]

Entry and Darshan[edit]
Non-Hindus are not permitted to enter the temple.[20][21][22] Visitors not allowed to enter may view the temple and precinct from the roof of the nearby Raghunandan Library and pay their respects to the image of God Jagannath seen at the main entrance to the temple.
The temple is open from 5:00am to 10:30pm. [23]

Cultural integrity[edit]
Starting from Jagannath himself, history has it that he was a tribal deity, adorned by the Sabar people, as a symbol of Narayan. Another legend claims him to be Nilamadhava, an image of Narayana made of blue stone and worshipped by the aboriginals. He was brought to Nilagiri (blue mountain) or Nilachala and installed there as Shri Jagannath in company with Balabhadra and Subhadra. The images made of wood are also claimed to have their distant linkage with the vanvasi (forest dwellers) system of worshipping wooden poles. To cap it all the Daitapatis, who have a fair share of responsibilities to perform rituals of the Temple, are claimed to be descendants of the hill tribes of Odisha. So we may safely claim that the beginning of the cultural history of Shrikshetra is found in the cultures of Hindu tribes. The three deities came to be claimed as the symbols of Samyak Darshan, Samyak Jnana and Samyak Charita usually regarded as Ratnatraya, triple gems of the Jain culture, assimilation of which leads to Omniscience and Moksha (salvation).[24]
Jagannath is worshipped as Vishnu or Narayana or Krishna and deityBalabhadra as Shesha. Simultaneously, the deities are regarded as the bhairava with Vimala (the devi or the consort of Shiva) installed in the campus of the temple. So ultimately we find a fusion of Saivism, Shaktism and Vaishnavism of the Hindu religion so reverently held together in Shrikshetra.[citation needed]

Acharyas and Jagannatha Puri[edit]
All of the renowned acharyas including Madhvacharya have been known to visit this kshetra. Adi Shankara established his Govardhana matha here. Guru Nanak had visited this place with his disciples Bala and Manda. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu of Gaudiya Vaishnavism stayed here for 24 years, establishing that the love of God can be spread by chanting the Hare Krishna mantra. Srimad Vallabhacharya Mahaprabhu visited Jagannath Puri and performed a 7-day recitation of Srimad Bhagvat. His sitting place is still famous as his "baithakji", roughly literally translating to his seat. It confirms his visit to Puri.[25]
A famous incident took place when JagadGuru Acharya Srimad Vallabhacharya Mahaprabhu visited. There was a Shastrartha being held between the Brahmins before the king himself and 4 questions were asked. Who is the highest of Gods, What is the highest of mantras, What is the highest scripture and What is the highest service. The discourse went on for many days with many schools of thought. Very young teen Vallabhacharyaji Mahaprabhu also joined the debated and answered all the questions at once. His answers were accepted and appreciated by all except few opposition scholars, they challenged the answers. The debate then resumed for a long period.[citation needed]
Finally Shri Vallabhacharya said to ask Jagannath to confirm Shri Vallabh's answers. It was mutually decided between all scholars and king that whatever Jagannath would write, it would be considered as the final and correct answer.[citation needed]
A pen, inkpot and the paper were left alone in the inner sanctum before the deity to write the answers.[citation needed]
After some time, the doors were opened and 4 answers were found to be written. 1) The Son of Devaki (Krishna) is the God of Gods 2) His name is the highest of mantras 3) Highest of all scriptures is Devki Putra's Bhagavat Geeta 4) Service to Him is the Highest service.[citation needed]
The king along with all other scholars were shocked and declared Shri Vallabh the winner of the discourse.[citation needed]
Some of the pandits who participated became jealous of young Shri Vallabh and wanted to test Him. The next day was Ekadashi, a fasting day where one must fast from grains. The pandits gave Shri Vallabh rice Prasad of Shri Jagannathji (The temple is famous for this). If Shri Vallabh ate it, He would break His vow of fasting but if He did not take it, He would disrespect Jagannath. Shri Vallabh with all honor and respect accepted the prasad in his hand. He stood there in the temple, spent the rest of the day and night explaining shlokas of the greatness of Prasad and ate the rice the next morning after sunrise.[26]
The Sikh Aarti Gagan mai thaal was recited by first guru, Guru Nanak[27] in 1506[28] or 1508[29][30] during his journey (called "udaasi") to east India,[28][29] at the revered Jagannath Temple, Puri. This arti is sung (not performed with platter and lamps etc.) daily after recitation of Rehraas Sahib and Ardās at the Harmandir Sahib, Amritsar and at most Gurudwara sahibs.[citation needed]

Char Dham[edit]
 Bird view of Jagannath Temple
The temple is one of the holiest Vaishnava Hindu Char Dham (four divine sites) sites also including Rameswaram, Badrinath, Puri and Dwarka.[31] Though the origins are not clearly known, the Advaita school of Hinduism propagated by Sankaracharya, who created Hindu monastic institutions across India, attributes the origin of Char Dham to the seer.[32] The four monasteries lie across the four corners of India and their attendant temples are Badrinath Temple at Badrinath in the North, Jagannath Temple at Puri in the East, Dwarakadheesh Temple at Dwarka in the West and Ramanathaswamy Temple at Rameswaram in the South.  Though ideologically the temples are divided between the sects of Hinduism, namely Saivism and Vaishnavism, the Char Dham pilgrimage is an all Hindu affair.[33] There are four abodes in Himalayas called Chota Char Dham (Chota meaning small): Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri and Yamunotri – all of these lie at the foothills of Himalayas[34][full citation needed] The name Chota was added during the mid of 20th century to differentiate the original Char Dhams.[citation needed] The journey across the four cardinal points in India is considered sacred by Hindus who aspire to visit these temples once in their lifetime. Traditionally the trip starts at the eastern end from Puri, proceeding in clockwise direction in a manner typically followed for circumambulation in Hindu temples.[35]

Structure[edit]
 Jagannath during Ratha Yatra, 2011
The huge temple complex covers an area of over 400,000 square feet (37,000 m2), and is surrounded by a high fortified wall. This 20 feet (6.1 m) high wall is known as Meghanada Pacheri.[36] Another wall known as kurma bedha surrounds the main temple.[37] It contains at least 120 temples and shrines. With its sculptural richness and fluidity of the Oriya style of temple architecture, it is one of the most magnificent monuments of India.[38] The temple has four distinct sectional structures, namely –

Deula, Vimana or Garba griha (Sanctum sanctorum) where the triad deities are lodged on the ratnavedi (Throne of Pearls). In Rekha Deula style;
Mukhashala (Frontal porch);
Nata mandir/Natamandapa, which is also known as the Jagamohan (Audience Hall/Dancing Hall), and
Bhoga Mandapa (Offerings Hall).[39]
The main temple is a curvilinear temple and crowning the top is the 'Neelachakra' (an eight spoked wheel) of deityVishnu.It is made out of Ashtadhatu and is considered sacrosanct.[40] Among the existing temples in Orissa, the temple of Shri Jagannath is the highest. The temple tower was built on a raised platform of stone and, rising to 214 feet (65 m) above the inner sanctum where the deities reside, dominates the surrounding landscape. The pyramidal roofs of the surrounding temples and adjoining halls, or mandapas, rise in steps toward the tower like a ridge of mountain peaks.[41]

Nila Chakra[edit]
The Nila Chakra (Blue Discus) is the discus mounted on the top shikhar of the Jagannath Temple. As per custom, everyday a different flag is waved on the Nila Chakra. The flag hoisted on the Nila Chakra is called the Patita Pavana (Purifier of the Fallen) and is equivalent to the image of the deities placed in the sanctum sanctorum.[42]
The Nila Chakra is a disc with eight Navagunjaras carved on the outer circumference, with all facing towards the flagpost above. It is made of alloy of eight metals (Asta-dhatu) and is 3.5 Metres (11 feet and 8 inches) high with a circumference of about 11 metres (36 feet).[43] During the year 2010, the Nila Chakra was repaired and restored by the Archaeological Survey of India.[citation needed]
The Nila Chakra is distinct from the Sudarshana chakra which has been placed with the deities in the inner sanctorum.[citation needed]
Nila Chakra is the most revered iconic symbol in the Jagannath tradition. The Nila Chakra is the only physical object whose markings are used as sacrament and considered sacred in Jagannath worship. It symbolizes protection by Shri Jagannath.[citation needed]

The Singhadwara[edit]
 The Singhadwara in 1870 showing the Lion sculptures with the Aruna Stambha Pillar in the foreground
The Singahdwara, which in Sanskrit means The Lion Gate, is one of the four gates to the temple and forms the Main entrance. The Singhadwara is so named because two huge statues of crouching lions exist on either side of the entrance. The gate faces east opening on to the Bada Danda or the Grand Road.[44] The Baisi Pahacha or the flight of twenty two steps leads into the temple complex. An deity of Jagannath known as Patitapavana, which in Sanskrit, means the "Saviour of the downtrodden and the fallen" is painted on the right side of the entrance. In ancient times when untouchables were not allowed inside the temple, they could pray to Patita Pavana. The statues of the two guards to the temple Jaya and Vijaya stand on either side of the doorway.[45] Just before the commencement of the Rath Yatra the deities of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra are taken out of the temple through this gate. On their return from the Gundicha Temple they have to ceremonially placate Goddess Mahalakshmi, whose deity is carved atop the door, for neglecting to take her with them on the Yatra. Only then the Goddess allows them permission to enter the temple. A magnificent sixteen-sided monolithic pillar known as the Aruna Stambha stands in front of the main gate. This pillar has an idol of Arun, the charioteer of the Sun God Surya, on its top. One significant thing about Arun stambha is that prior it was located in the Konark Sun temple,[46][47] later, the Maratha guru Brahmachari Gosain brought this pillar from Konark.[48]

Other entrances[edit]
 The Ashwadwara Gate
Apart from the Singhadwara, which is the main entrance to the temple, there are three other entrances facing north, south and west. They are named after the sculptures of animals guarding them. The other entrances are the Hathidwara or the Elephant Gate, the Vyaghradwara or the Tiger Gate and the Ashwadwara or the Horse Gate.[citation needed]

Minor temples[edit]
 Cluster of minor temples in the southern part of Jagannath temple complex, including the Vimala Temple (extreme right), c. 1890
There are numerous smaller temples and shrines within the Temple complex where active worship is regularly conducted. The Vimala Temple (Bimala Temple) is considered one of the most important of the Shaktipeeths marks the spot where the Goddess Sati's navel fell. It is located near Rohini Kund in the temple complex. Until food offered to Jagannath is offered to Goddess Vimala it is not considered Mahaprasad.[citation needed]
The temple of Mahalakshmi has an important role in rituals of the main temple. It is said that preparation of naivedya as offering for Jagannath is supervised by Mahalakshmi. The Kanchi Ganesh Temple is dedicated to Uchchhishta Ganapati. Tradition says the King of Kanchipuram (Kanchi) in ancient times gifted the deity, when Gajapati Purushottama Deva married Padmavati, the kanchi princess. There are other shrines namely Muktimandap, Surya, Saraswati, Bhuvaneshwari, Narasimha, Rama, Hanuman and Eshaneshwara.[citation needed]

The Mandapas[edit]
 The Dola Mandapa in 1890 where the annual Dol Yatra is held.
There are many Mandapas or Pillared halls on raised platforms within the temple complex meant for religious congregations. The most prominent is the Mukti Mandapa the congregation hall of the holy seat of selected learned Brahmins.[49]
Here important decisions regarding conduct of daily worship and festivals are taken. The Dola Mandapa is noteworthy for a beautifully carved stone Torana or arch which is used for constructing a swing for the annual Dol Yatra festival. During the festival the deity of Dologobinda is placed on the swing. The Snana Bedi is a rectangular stone platform where deities of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra are placed for ceremonial bathing during the annual Snana Yatra.[citation needed]

Daily food offerings[edit]
Main article: Mahaprasad (Jagannath Temple)
Daily offerings are made to the deity six times a day. These include:

The offering to the deity in the morning that forms his breakfast and is called Gopala Vallabha Bhoga. Breakfast consists of seven items i.e. Khua, Lahuni, Sweetened coconut grating, Coconut water, and popcorn sweetened with sugar known as Khai, Curd and Ripe bananas.
The Sakala Dhupa forms his next offering at about 10 AM. This generally consists of 13 items including the Enduri cake & Mantha puli.
Bada Sankhudi Bhoga forms the next repast & the offering consists of Pakhala with curd and Kanji payas. The offerings are made in the Bhog Mandapa, about 200 feet from the Ratnabedi. This is called Chatra Bhog and was introduced by Adi Shankaracharya in the eighth century to help pilgrims share the temple food.
The Madhyanha dhupa forms the next offering at the noon.
The next offering to the deity is made in the evening at around 8 PM it is Sandhya Dhupa.
The last offering to the deity is called the Bada Simhara Bhoga.[50]
The Mahaprasad of Jagannath are distributed amongst the devotees near the Ratnavedi inside the frame of Phokaria, which is being drawn by the Puja pandas using Muruj, except for the Gopal Ballav Bhog and Bhog Mandap Bhoga which are distributed in the Anabsar Pindi & Bhoga Mandap respectively.

Rosaghara[edit]
Main article: Rosaghara
The temple's kitchen is the largest in the world.[38][51][52][53] Tradition holds that all Mahaprasad cooking in the temple kitchens is supervised by the Goddess Mahalakshmi, the empress of Srimandir herself, and that if the food prepared has any fault in it, a shadow dog appears near the temple kitchen, a sign of her displeasure. If the shadow dog is seen, the food is promptly buried and a new batch cooked.[54] All 56 varieties of food produced are vegetarian and prepared without onions, garlic, as prescribed by Hindu religious texts.[55] Cooking is done only in earthen pots using water drawn from two special wells near the kitchen called Ganga and Yamuna. The most awaited offering is Kotho Bhoga or Abadha, offered after midday. After being offered to Jagannath and the other deities, the food is sold at Ananda Bajara, an open food market inside the temple.[citation needed]

Festivals[edit]
 Ratha Yatra Festival in Puri, a painting by James Fergusson
Main article: List of festivals observed at Jagannatha Temple, Puri
There are elaborate daily worship services. There are many festivals each year attended by millions of people. The most important festival is the Rath Yatra or the Chariot festival in June. This spectacular festival includes a procession of three huge chariots bearing the deities of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra through the Bada Danda meaning the Grand Avenue of Puri until their final destination the Gundicha Temple.[56]
Early European observers told tales of devotees being crushed under the wheels of these chariots, whether by accident or even as a form of meritorious suicide akin to suttee.  These reports gave rise to the loan word juggernaut suggesting something immense and unstoppable. Many festivals like Dol Yatra in spring and Jhulan Yatra in monsoon are celebrated by temple every year. Pavitrotsava and Damanaka utsava are celebrated as per panchanga or panjika. There are special ceremonies in the month of Kartika and Pausha.[citation needed]
The annual shodasha dinatmaka or 16-day puja beginning 8 days prior to Mahalaya of Ashwin month for Goddess Vimala and ending on Vijayadashami, is of great importance, in which both the utsava murty of lord Madanmohan and Vimala take part.[citation needed]

Pana Sankranti: Also known or Vishuva Sankranti and Mesha Sankranti: Special rituals are performed at the temple.[57]
Chandan Yatra[edit]
Main article: Chandan Yatra
In Akshaya Tritiya every year the Chandan Yatra festival marks the commencement of the construction of the Chariots of the Rath Yatra.

Snnana Yatra[edit]
On the Purnima of the month of Jyestha the Gods are ceremonially bathed and decorated every year on the occasion of Snana Yatra.[citation needed]

Anavasara or Anasara[edit]
Main article: Snana Yatra
Literally means vacation. Every year, the main deities of Jagannath, Balabhadra, Subhadra & Sudarshan after the holy Snana Yatra on the jyestha purnima, go to a secret altar named Anavasara Ghar where they remain for the next dark fortnight (Krishna paksha). Hence devotees are not allowed to view them. So devotees worship at the nearby Brahmagiri temple of Alarnath, an icon of a four-handed Vishnu as a manifestation of Jagannath.[58] Devotees get the first glimpse of the devotees on the day before Rath Yatra, which is called Navayouvana. It is said that the deities fall in fever after taking a huge bath and they are treated by the special servants named, Daitapatis for 15 days. During this period cooked food is not offered to the deities.[59]

Rath Yatra at Puri[edit]
Main article: Ratha-Yatra (Puri)
 Pahandi Bije during Ratha Yatra at Puri
The Jagannath triad are usually worshiped in the sanctum of the temple at Puri, but once during the month of Asadha (Rainy Season of Orissa, usually falling in month of June or July), they are brought out onto the Bada Danda (main street of Puri) and travel (3 km) to the Shri Gundicha Temple, in huge chariots (ratha), allowing the public to have darśana (Holy view). This festival is known as Rath Yatra, meaning the journey (yatra) of the chariots (ratha). The Rathas are huge wheeled wooden structures, which are built anew every year and are pulled by the devotees. The chariot for Jagannath is approximately 45 feet high and 35 feet square and takes about 2 months to construct.[60] The artists and painters of Puri decorate the cars and paint flower petals and other designs on the wheels, the wood-carved charioteer and horses, and the inverted lotuses on the wall behind the throne.[61] The huge chariots of Jagannath pulled during Rath Yatra is the etymological origin of the English word Juggernaut.[62] The Ratha-Yatra is also termed as the Shri Gundicha yatra.[citation needed]
The most significant ritual associated with the Ratha-Yatra is the chhera pahara. During the festival, the Gajapati King wears the outfit of a sweeper and sweeps all around the deities and chariots in the Chera Pahara (sweeping with water) ritual. The Gajapati King cleanses the road before the chariots with a gold-handled broom and sprinkles sandalwood water and powder with utmost devotion.  As per the custom, although the Gajapati King has been considered the most exalted person in the Kalingan kingdom, he still renders the menial service to Jagannath. This ritual signified that under the lordship of Jagannath, there is no distinction between the powerful sovereign Gajapati King and the most humble devotee.[63] Chera pahara is held on two days, on the first day of the Ratha Yatra, when the deities are taken to garden house at Mausi Maa Temple and again on the last day of the festival, when the deities are ceremoniously brought back to the Shri Mandir.[citation needed]
As per another ritual, when the deities are taken out from the Shri Mandir to the Chariots in Pahandi vijay.[citation needed]

 Drawing of Rath Yatra, Puri from the book, 'Account Of The Temple Of Jagannath, 1895'
In the Ratha Yatra, the three deities are taken from the Jagannath Temple in the chariots to the Gundicha Temple, where they stay for nine days. Thereafter, the deities again ride the chariots back to Shri Mandir in bahuda yatra. On the way back, the three chariots halt at the Mausi Maa Temple and the deities are offered Poda Pitha, a kind of baked cake which are generally consumed by the Odisha people only.[citation needed]
The observance of the Rath Yatra of Jagannath dates back to the period of the Puranas. Vivid descriptions of this festival are found in Brahma Purana, Padma Purana, and Skanda Purana. Kapila Samhita also refers to Rath Yatra. In Moghul period also, King Ramsingh of Jaipur, Rajasthan has been described as organizing the Rath Yatra in the 18th century. In Orissa, Kings of Mayurbhanj and Parlakhemundi were organizing the Rath Yatra, though the most grand festival in terms of scale and popularity takes place at Puri.[citation needed]
Moreover, Starza[64] notes that the ruling Ganga dynasty instituted the Rath Yatra at the completion of the great temple around 1150 AD. This festival was one of those Hindu festivals that was reported to the Western world very early. Friar Odoric of Pordenone visited India in 1316–1318, some 20 years after Marco Polo had dictated the account of his travels while in a Genoese prison.[65] In his own account of 1321, Odoric reported how the people put the deities on chariots, and the King and Queen and all the people drew them from the "church" with song and music.[66][67]

Niladri Bije[edit]
Celebrated on Asadha Trayodashi.[68] Niladri Bije is the concluding day of Ratha yatra. On this day deities return to the ratna bedi.[69][70] Jagannath offers Rasgulla[71] to Goddess Laxmi to enter into the temple.[72][73]





Temple main gate




Gupta Gundicha[edit]
Celebrated for 16 days from Ashwina Krushna dwitiya to Vijayadashami.[74] As per tradition, the deity of Madhaba, along with the deity  of Goddess Durga (known as Durgamadhaba), is taken on a tour of the temple premises. The tour within the temple is observed for the first eight days. For the next eight days, the deities are taken outside the temple on a palanquin to the nearby Narayani temple situated in the Dolamandapa lane. After their worship, they are brought back to the temple.[75]

Nabakalebara[edit]
Main article: Nabakalevara
Nabakalabera is a ritual associated with Jagannath[76] which takes place every 8, 12 or 19 years, when one lunar month of Ashadha is followed by another lunar month of Aashadha. Meaning "New Body", the ritual involves installation of new images in the Jagannath Temple and the burial of the old images at the temple at Koili Vaikuntha. The festival is witnessed by as millions of people and its budget exceeds $500,000.[77] More than three million devotees were expected to visit the temple during the Nabakalevara in 2015,[78] making it one of the most visited festivals in the world.[citation needed]

Management[edit]
After independence, the State Government, with a view to getting better administrative system, passed "The Puri Shri Jagannath Temple (Administration) Act, 1952".[79] It contained provisions to prepare the Record of Rights and duties of Sevayats and such other persons connected with the system of worship and management of the temple. Subsequently Shri Jagannath Temple Act, 1955 was enacted to reorganize the management system of the affair of the temple and its properties.[citation needed]
Dibyasingha Deb is the "adhyasevak" (chief servitor) of the temple.[80][81] He took the role in 1970 at the age of 17, after the death of his father, Birakishore Deb, then the Maharaja of Puri.[82]





The backside of the Jagannath temple with the 'Koili Baikuntha' garden in the foreground.






Shri Dibyasingha Deb, Chief Servitor of the Temple.






Bird's EyeView Of Jagannath Temple complex




Security[edit]
The security at the temple has increased ahead of Ratha Yatra, the homecoming festival of the deities of Jagannath temple. In the wake of terror alert on 27 June 2012, the security forces were increased to ensure smooth functioning of the crowded Ratha Yatra and Suna Besha.[83]


See also[edit]
Chari Kshetra
Shivala Teja Singh temple
References[edit]


^ Cesarone, Bernard (2012). "Bernard Cesarone: Pata-chitras of Odisha". asianart.com. Retrieved 2 July 2012. This temple was built in approximately 1135–1150 by Codaganga, a king of the Eastern Ganga dynasty

^  https://www.thehindu.com/society/history-and-culture/jagannath-temple-heritage-corridor-controversy-explained/article65438863.ece. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)

^ Nugteren, Albertina (2010). "Weaving Nature into Myth: Continuing Narratives Of Wood, Trees, And Forests In The Ritual Fabric Around The God Jagannath In Puri". Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature and Culture. 4 (2): 159–172. doi:10.1558/jsrnc.v4i2.159.

^ Balaram Mohanty (1979). Introducing Orissa. Konarka Prakasani. p. 84.

^ Swami B. P. Puri (1 August 2017). Guru: The Universal Teacher. Simon and Schuster. p. 297. ISBN 9781683832454.

^ K. V. Raman (2006). Temple Art, Icons and Culture of India and South-East Asia. Sharada Publishing House. p. 138. ISBN 9788188934317. Similarly, places like Srirangam associated with Ramanuja, Udupi (in Karnataka) with Madhvacharya, Pandharpur with the Maharashtra saints like Jnanesvar and Tukaram and Puri Jagannath with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

^ Swami Prabhavananda (9 April 2019). The Spiritual Heritage of India. Routledge. p. 292. ISBN 9780429627552.

^ Suryanarayan Das 2010, pp. 49–50.

^ Suryanarayan Das 2010, p. 50.

^ Suryanarayan Das 2010, pp. 50–51.

^ Suryanarayan Das 2010, p. 51.

^ Suryanarayan Das 2010, pp. 51–52.

^ "Deities in Lord Jagannath Temple – Jagannath Temple". jagannathtemplepuri.com. 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. along with Balabhadra, Subhadra, Sudarshan, Madhaba, Sridevi and Bhudevi on the Ratnabedi or the bejewelled platform.

^ "Juggernaut of Puri". Retrieved 20 September 2006.

^ Amalananda Ghosh (December 1990). An Encyclopaedia of Indian Archaeology. BRILL Academic. p. 161. ISBN 90-04-09264-1.

^ Srivastava, Mayank (25 July 2019). "Jagannath Puri Temple". newstrend.news (in Hindi). Newstrend. Retrieved 1 June 2021.

^ "Sri Jagannath Puri Dham Information – Jagannath". jagannathpuri-info.net. 2012. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. The King wanted Lord Brahma to consecrate the temple

^ "Jagannath Temple at Puri". Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ Dash, Abhimanyu (July 2011). "Invasions on the Temple of Lord Jagannath, Puri" (PDF). Orissa Review: 82–89. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2014.

^ "Jagannath Temple". Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ Puri temple in Hindu gaffe Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The Telegraph, Calcutta – 8 November 2007

^ "Jagannatha Puri". Archived from the original on 15 July 2006. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ "Jagannath Darshan". http://jagannath.nic.in. Jagannath Temple Administration. Retrieved 27 June 2014.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ http://magazines.odisha.gov.in/Orissareview/jul2005/engpdf/jainism_budhism_in_joga-culture.pdf[bare URL PDF]

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2010.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Shri Mad Vallabhacharya Mahaprabhuji | Shrinathji Temple, Nathdwara". www.nathdwaratemple.org. Retrieved 25 September 2021.

^ http://www.livehindustan.com/news/tayaarinews/tayaarinews/article1-story-67-67-199585.html गुरु नानक देव और उनके द्वारा प्रवर्तित मार्ग

^ a b "Orissa Review – Feb–March 2012" (PDF). orissa.gov.in. Retrieved 12 March 2022.

^ a b "Home". 13 November 2013.

^ http://www.sikh-heritage.co.uk/Scriptures/Guru%20Granth/Guru%20Granth.htm [dead link]

^ Mahadev Chakravarti 1986, p. 140.

^ Mittal, Sushil (2004). The Hindu World. New York: Routledge. p. 482. ISBN 0-203-64470-0.

^ Norbert C. Brockman 2011, pp. 94–96.

^ Gupta 2008, p. 484–486

^ Paul Gwynne 2017, p. 296.

^ "About Sakhigopal". samsepuja.in. 2012. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 26 June 2012. The outermost is called 'Meghanad Pacheri' which has a length of 650ft from east to west and breadth of 644ft from north to south direction. The height of Meghanad Pacheri is 20ft and thickness of 6ft

^ "Lord Jagannath:Inside the temple of the lord, Jagannath Puri, Jagannath Temple, Orissa". orissa.oriyaonline.com. 2012. Archived from the original on 27 May 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. and kurma Bedha (the inner wall) or the inner enclosure of the Jagannath temple i

^ a b "Sri Jagannath". Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ "Jagannath Temple, India – 7 wonders". 7wonders.org. 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2012. The temple is divided into four chambers: Bhogmandir, Natamandir, Jagamohana and Deul

^ "Architecture of Jagannath Temple, Jagannath Puri Architecture, Puri Jagannath Temple India". orissatourism.org. 2012. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2012. wheel on top of the Jagannath Temple made of an alloy of eight metals (astadhatu). It is called the Nila Chakra (Blue Wheel)

^ "Jagannath Temple, Orrisa". Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 20 September 2006.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2014.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Nilachakra is now repairing by Archaeological Survey of India — PURIWAVES | PURIWAVES | photonews || puri odisha || purinews || | Nilachakra is now repairing by Archaeological... Archived 12 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ "About Temple – Devotee Care Center". devoteecare.fullorissa.com. 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2012. Two colossal lions flank the Purba Dwara (Eastern Gate) also known as Simha Dwara. This is a mini tower and the main entrance to the temple[dead link]

^ "Sri Jagannath Temple". Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 20 September 2006.

^ "Main Temple Complex – Sun Temple, Konarak – Archaeological Survey of India". asi.nic.in. 2011. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2012. To the front of the eastern staircase of the porch, once stood the free-standing chlorite pillar, the dhvaja-stambha, with Aruna, the charioteer of Surya as the crowning element

^ "Aruna Stambha | PURIWAVES". puriwaves.nirmalya.in. 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2012. this Pillar was a part of Sun Temple Of Konark and was located in front of Sun Temple

^ Behera, Prajna Paramita (2004). "The Pillars of Homage to Lord Jagannatha" (PDF). Orissa Review. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2012.

^ "JAGANNATH TEMPLE, SANCTUARIES, MANDAPS OF LORD JAGANNATH TEMPLE PURI". jagannath.orissaculture.com. 2009. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. It is allowed only for Sankaracharya, Brahmins of 16 sasans and for Jhulan yatra.

^ "Rituals of LORDS". jagannath.nic.in. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 25 December 2012. This is the last bhoga of the day.

^ Karan, Jajati (2009). "God's own kitchen vies for no record – India News – IBNLive". ibnlive.in.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2012. the Jagannath temple in Puri has the world's largest kitchen that can feed more than one lakh people at a time

^ "The Sampradaya Sun – Independent Vaisnava News – Feature Stories – June 2011". harekrsna.com. 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Not only is it the largest temple kitchen in the world

^ "Amazing Orissa". nilachakra.org. 2011. Archived from the original on 26 March 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2012. The Jagannath temple kitchen at Puri is reputed to be the largest kitchen in the world

^ "Kitchen of Lord Jagannath – Devotee Care Center". devoteecare.fullorissa.com. 2012. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 28 September 2012. If the dog is seen, all the food must be buried and prepared again

^ "Jagannath Temple, Jagannath Puri, Jagannath Temple Puri, Jagannath Temple of Puri, Jagannath Temple Odisha, Jagannath Temple Orissa". visitodisha.net. 2012. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2012. The Prasad is prepared in a very traditional way, without using onion, garlic, chillies

^ "Jagannath Temple at Puri". Retrieved 20 September 2006.

^ "Festivals of lord jagannath, puri festivals". fullorissa.com. 2010. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Pana Sankranti or Mahabishuba sankranti:

^ "Alarnatha – Articles – Jagannath Dham". jagannathdham.com. 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. peoples believe that Lord Jagannath during this time manifests as Alarnath Dev,

^ "Festivals of Lord Sri Jagannath". nilachakra.org. 2010. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. suffer from fever on the account of elaborate bath and for that they are kept in dietary provisions (No cooked food is served) and are nursed by the Daitas

^ O. M. Starza 1993, p. 16.

^ Das 1982, p. 40. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDas1982 (help)

^ "Juggernaut-Definition and Meaning". Merriam Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 28 November 2012.

^ Karan, Jajati (4 July 2008). "Lord Jagannath yatra to begin soon". IBN Live. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 28 November 2012.

^ O. M. Starza 1993, p. 133.

^ Partha Mitter 1977, p. 10. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPartha_Mitter1977 (help)

^ O. M. Starza 1993, p. 129.

^ J. P. Das 1982, p. 48.

^ "Festivals of Lord Sri Jagannath". nilachakra.org. 2010. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. NILADRI BIJE – Celebrated on 13th day of bright fortnight of Asadha.

^ "Ocean of devotees on Grand road to witness Sunavesh". news.oneindia.in. 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. entering in to the sanctum sanctorum popularly called Niladri Bije

^ "Niladri Bije – Lord Jagannath Returning to Shree Mandir | PURIWAVES". puriwaves.nirmalya.in. 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. 'Niladri Bije', the return journey to Shree Mandir. It is the welcome festival of Lord Jagannath to Shree Mandir

^ https://www.divinechariots.com/2018/03/03/the-divine-food-mahaprashad/[permanent dead link]

^ "Lord placates wife with sweet delight". divinechariots.com. Odisha, India. 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. Lord Jagannath tries to mollify His wife by offering her rasagullas, so that she lets Him enter the temple with His siblings[permanent dead link]

^ "Lord Jagannath placates angry Mahalakshmi, reenters temple". The Pioneer. India. 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. Jagannath then offers Mahalakshmi rasgullas to placate her and to forgive him

^ Panda, Namita (11 October 2010). "The Telegraph – Calcutta (Kolkata) | Gupta Gundicha attracts devotees". The Telegraph. Calcutta, India. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2012. Beginning from Ashwina Krishna dwitiya to the last day of Dusherra,

^ "Gupta Gundicha in Srikhetra – Start of Durga Madhab worshiping | PURIWAVES". puriwaves.nirmalya.in. Retrieved 20 December 2012. The Vimanbadu servants ( who carry the chariot) carry Sri Durga – Madhab ( Sri Jagannath & Jaya Durga ) in a chariot to the temple of Narayani at Dolamandap Sahi.

^ "Showing posts with label Jagannatha Nabakalebara". Divine Chariots. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019.

^ "Puri gearing up for 2015 Nabakalebar". The Pioneer. India. 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 4 January 2013. Nabakalebar ritual of Lord Jagannath to be held in 2015,

^ "Plans afoot to manage Nabakalebar crowd". The Times of India. 12 July 2014. Retrieved 13 July 2014.

^ Manti, J.C. (2007). The Saga of Jagannatha and Badadeula at Puri. p. 100. ISBN 9788176257473. Retrieved 1 July 2015.

^ "Jagannath temple servitors oppose untimely ISKON Rathyatra". news.oneindia.in. 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2012. Gajapati King, who is considered as the chief servitor of the temple

^ "Lord Jagannath:Sevayats, complete list of servitors of Lord Jagannath, Jagannath Puri, Jagannath Temple, Orissa". orissa.oriyaonline.com. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2012. The Gajapati (The King of Puri) is treated as the first and foremost Servitor of the Temple

^ "I can walk and not take the palanquin'". The Times of India. 2011. Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2013. I ascended the throne in July 1970 when my father Gajapati Birakishore Deb died in the midst of the car festival. I was then only 17

^ "Terror alert in Puri, security tightened". The Times of India. 27 June 2012.


Bibliography[edit]

Avinash Patra (2011). Origin & Antiquity of the Cult of Lord Jagannath. Oxford University Press.
J. P. Das (1982). Puri Paintings: The Chitrakara and His Work. Prafulla. ISBN 978-81-901589-7-8.
Mahadev Chakravarti (1986). The Concept of Rudra-Śiva Through the Ages. Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-81-208-0053-3.
Norbert C. Brockman (2011). Encyclopedia of Sacred Places. California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-59884-655-3.
O. M. Starza (1993). The Jagannatha Temple at Puri: Its Architecture, Art, and Cult. BRILL. ISBN 90-04-09673-6.
Partha Mitter (1992). Much Maligned Monsters: A History of European Reactions to Indian Art. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-53239-4.
Paul Gwynne (2017). World Religions in Practice: A Comparative Introduction. Wiley. ISBN 978-1-118-97228-1.
Suryanarayan Das (2010). Lord Jagannath. Sanbun. ISBN 978-93-80213-22-4.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jagannath Temple, Puri.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Jagannath Temple, Puri.




Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Jagannath Temple.

Puruṣottama-kṣetra-māhātmya, Skanda Purana
Official website 
deitySri Jagannath Temple  –  Jagannath Dharma (Official website of the Puri district administration)
Street View around Jagannath Temple
vteJagannath worshipDeities
Jagannath
Balabhadra
Subhadra
Sudarshana Chakra
TemplesOdisha
Puri
Gundicha
Baripada
Gunupur
Koraput
Nayagarh
Bhubaneswar
Kendrapara
Chhatia Bata
Dharakote
Patali Srikhetra
Barbil
Rest of India
Agartala
Ahmedabad
Alwar
Bangalore
Chennai
Delhi
Digha
Hajo
Hyderabad
Ranchi
Medinipur
Mahesh
Abroad
Comilla
Dhamrai
Pabna
South Africa
Sialkot
Festivals
Chandan Yatra
Dola Yatra
Panchaka
Nabakalebara
2015
Rath Yatra
Snana Yatra
Besha
Suna Besha
Texts
Bhagavata Purana
Brahma Purana
Gita Govinda
Kapila Purana
Madala Panji
Skanda Purana
Dahuka boli
Devotees
Indradyumna
Jayadeva
Sarala Dasa
Balarama Dasa
Atibadi Jagannatha Dasa
Jasobanta Dasa
Ananta Dasa
Achyutananda
Salabega
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
Madhavi Pattanayak
Dinakrushna Das
Banamali Dasa
Upendra Bhanja
Kabisurjya Baladeba Ratha
Gopalakrusna Pattanayaka
See also
Odissi music
Gahana Vije
Mahaprasad
Nilachal
Nila Chakra
Neela Madhava
Samkha Kshetra
Shri Jagannath Temple Act, 1955
ISKCON

 Category

vteVishnu templesAndhra Pradesh
Venkateswara Temple, Tirupati
Ahobilam
Annavaram Satyanarayana Temple
Dwaraka Tirumala
Simhachalam
Mangalagiri
Govindaraja Temple, Tirupati
Kodandarama Temple, Tirupati
Srinivasamangapuram
Appalayagunta
Varahaswamy Temple, Tirumala
Vontimitta
Narayanavanam
Nagalapuram
Karvetinagaram
Keelapatla
Srikurmam
Srikakula Andhra Mahavishnu Temple
Ranganatha Temple, Nellore
Kodandarama Temple, Gollala Mamidada
Narasimha Konda
Penchalakona
Bapatla
Chintalarayaswami Temple
Antarvedi
Ramateertham
Padmanabham
Buchireddipalem
Koulutla Chenna Kesava Temple
Jammalamadugu
Therani
Bihar
Vishnupad Mandir
Gujarat
Dwarka
Karnataka
Shivanasamudra
Srirangapatna
Udupi
Melukote
Devarayanadurga
Kerala
Thiruvananthapuram
Thirukatkarai
Moozhikkalam
Tiruvalla
Thirukadithanam
Sengunroor
Thiruppuliyoor
Thiruvaaranvilai
Thiruvanvandoor
Thiru naavaay
Viththuvakkodu
Guruvayur
Ambalappuzha
Tripunithura
Thirunelli
Varkala
MaharastraPandharpurNepal
Barahachhetra
Bishnupaduka
Muktinath / Saligramam (Nepal)
Orissa
Puri
Tamil Nadu
Thirumeyyam
Thirukoshtiyur
Koodal Azhagar Temple
Azhagar Kovil
Tirumogoor
Srivilliputhur
Tiruththangal
Thiruppullani
Tirukkacchi
Ashtabujakaram
Tiruvekkaa
Tiruththanka
Tiruvelukkai
Tirukalvanoor
Tiru oorakam
Tiru neeragam
Tiru kaaragam
Tirukaarvaanam
Tiru parameswara vinnagaram
Tiru pavala vannam
Tiru paadagam
Tiru nilaaththingal thundam
Thiruputkuzhi
Thiruvallikeni
Thiruneermalai
Thiruvidandai
Thirukadalmallai
Thiruninravur
Thiruvallur
Thirukkadigai
Thiruvazhunthoor
Thiruindaloor
Kazheesirama Vinnagaram
Thirukkavalampadi
Thiruchsemponsey
Thiruarimeya Vinnagaram
Thiru Vanpurushothamam
Thiruvaikunda vinnagaram
Thirumanimadam
Thiruthevanartthogai
Thiruthetriyambalam
Thirumanikkoodam
Thiruvellakkulam
Thiruppaarththanpalli
Thalai Sanga Nanmathiyam
Thiruchsirupuliyur
Thiruvali-Thirunagari
Thiruccithra kootam
Thirukkannangudi
Thirunagai
Thiru Thanjai
Tirukkoilur
Thirukkoodaloor
Thiru Kavith Thalam
Thiru Adhanoor
Thirupullabhoothangudi
Thirukkudandhai
Thiruccherai
Thirunandipura Vinnagaram
ThiruNaraiyoor
Thiruvinnagar
Thiruvelliyangudi
Thirukkanamangai
Thirukkkannapuram
Thirukkandiyur
Srirangam
Thirukkozhi
Thirukkarambanoor
Thiruvellarai
Thiru Anbil
Thirupper Nagar
Thiruvanthipuram
Thiruvaramangai
Thirukkurungudi
Srivaikundam
Thiruvaragunamangai
Thiruppulingudi
Thirukkurugoor
Thirutthulaivillimangalam
Thirukkoloor
Thirukkulandhai
Thentirupperai
Thiruvattaru
Thiruvanparisaram
Gunaseelam
Telangana
Bhadrachalam
Yadadri
Kuchadri
Birla Mandir, Hyderabad
Mattapalli
Dharmapuri
Uttar Pradesh
Naimisaranya
Mathura
Gokul
Ayodhya
Uttarakhand
Devprayag
Thiruppirithi
Badrinath
Vishnuprayag
Panch Prayag
Vinnulagam  (Outside the Earthly realm)
Thirupaarkadal
Thiruparamapadham
Other
Pancharanga Kshetrams

vteKrishnaForms
Bala Krishna
Gopala-Krishna
Govinda
Jagannath
Radha Krishna
Shrinathji
Vāsudeva-Krishna
Vithoba
Other names
Consorts
Radha
Ashtabharya
Rukmini
Satyabhama
Jambavati
Kalindi
Nagnajiti
Mitravinda
Lakshmana
Bhadra
Other 16000 - 16100 Junior wives
Rohini
Other relatives
Aniruddha
Arjuna
Balarama
Devaki
Kamsa
Kunti
Nanda
Pradyumna
Samba
Subhadra
Ugrasena
Vasudeva
Yashoda
More
Worship
Sects
Krishnaism
Vaishnavism
Festivals
Krishna Janmashtami
Gita Mahotsav
Holi
Pilgrimage circuits
48 Kos Parikrama of Kurukshetra
Vraja Parikrama
Holy sites
Associated with Krishna's life
Mathura
Gokul
Govardhan Hill
Vrindavan
Dvarka
Kurukshetra
Jyotisar
Bhalka
Other sites:
Guruvayur
Nathdwara
Pandharpur
Puri
Udupi
Epigraphy
Hathibada Ghosundi
Heliodorus pillar
Mora Well
Naneghat
Vasu Doorjamb
Texts
Bhagavata Purana
Gita Govinda
Mahabharata
Bhagavad Gita
Krishna's role
Brahma Samhita
Uddhava Gita
See also
Svayam Bhagavan
Avatar
Dashavatara
Vishnu
Guru–shishya tradition

vteHindu temples in OdishaBhubaneswarShiva temples
Aisanyesvara Siva Temple
Akhadachandi Temple
Astasambhu Temples
Bhima Kunda
Bhringesvara Siva Temple
Bhrukutesvar Siva Temple
Brahmeswara Temple
Byamokesvara Temple
Chakreshvari Siva Temple
Champakesvara Siva Temple
Chandrasekhara Mahadeva Temple
Chintamanisvara Siva Temple
Devasabha Temple
Dishisvara Siva Temple
Gangesvara Siva Temple
Gosagaresvar Siva Temple
Jaleswar Siva Temple Precinct
Kalika Siva Temple
Kapilesvara Siva Temple
Kedareswar Temple
Labesvara Siva Temple
Ladu Baba Temple
Lakhesvara Siva Temple
Lingaraj Temple
Madneswar Siva Temple
Mangalesvara Siva Temple
Manibhadresvara Temple - II
Mukteswar Temple
Nagesvara Temple, Bhubaneswar
Pabaneswara Temple
Papanasini Siva Temple
Parsurameswar Temple
Purvesvara Siva Temple
Rajarani Temple
Rameshwar Deula
Sarvatresvara Siva Temple
Siddhesvara Siva Temple
Subarnesvara Siva Temple
Suka Temple
Sukutesvara Temple
Svapnesvara Siva Temple
Talesvara Siva Temple
Tirthesvara Siva Temple
Uttaresvara Siva Temple
Vaital Deula
Yameshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Ananta Vasudeva Temple
Bharati Matha
Gandhi Garabadu Precinct Vishnu Temple
Ram Mandir, Bhubaneswar
Vishnu Temple, Bhubaneswar
Shakti temples
Chausathi Jogini Temple
Parvati Temple, Odisha
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Bindusagar
Hanuman Temple, Kedara-Gouri
Sivatirtha Matha
Cuttack districtShiva temples
Chateshwar Temple
Dhabaleswar
Simhanath Temple
Vishnu temples
Madhava Temple
Shakti temples
Bhattarika Temple
Charchika Temple
Cuttack Chandi Temple
Durga Temple, Baideshwar
Durga Temple, Motia
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Niali
Puri districtShiva temples
Beleswar Temple
Lokanatha Temple
Markandeshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Alarnatha Mandira
Chakra Narasimha Temple
Gundicha Temple
Jagannath Temple, Puri
Narasimha Temple, Puri
Sakshigopal Temple
Shakti temples
Bata Mangala Temple
Kakatpur Mangala Temple
Mausi Maa Temple
Ramachandi Temple
Varahi Deula, Chaurasi
Vimala Temple
Sun temples
Konark Sun Temple
Other temples
Govardhana matha
Emar Matha
Western OdishaShiva temples
Kosaleswara temple
Leaning Temple of Huma
Vishnu temples
Nrusinghanath Temple
Patali Srikhetra
Shakti temples
Lankeswari Temple
Samaleswari Temple
Sureswari temple
Other temples
Harishankar Temple
Sasisena Temple
Rayagada districtShiva temples
Bhimashankar
Chatikona
Nilakantheswar Temple
Pataleswar
Vishnu temples
Jagannath Temple, Gunupur
Jagannath Temple, Rayagada
Laxminarayan temple, Therubali
Shakti temples
Maa Markama Temple
Majhighariani Temple
OtherShiva temples
Ajaikapada Bhairava Temple
Akhandalamani Temple
Annakoteshvara Temple
Bhuvaneshwar Temple, Boudh
Chandaneswar
Gupteswar Cave
Godhaneswar temple
Indralath Temple
Kapilash Temple
Murga Mahadeva Shrine
Nilakantheswar Temple
Panchalingeshwar
Sekhareswar Temple
Vishnu temples
Anantasaayi Vishnu Temple
Ananta Shayana
Anantashayana Vishnu
Baladevjew Temple
Chhatia Bata
Jagannath Temple, Baripada
Jagannath Temple, Dharakote
Jagannath Temple, Koraput
Jagannath Temple, Nayagarh
Khirachora Gopinatha Temple
Lakhmi Varaha Temple
Narayana Gosain Temple
Nilamadhav Temple
Odogaon Raghunath Temple
Varahanatha Temple
Shakti temples
Bhadrakali Temple, Aharapada
Bhagabati Temple, Banapur
Biraja Temple
Ghanteswari Temple
Goddess Maheshwari
Kalijai
Kanaka Durga, Raulapalli
Kichakeshwari Temple
Maa Barunei Temple
Maa Tarini Temple, Ghatgaon
Maa Ugra Tara
Maa Markama Temple
Mahishamardini Temple
Majhighariani Temple
Manikeshwari Temple
Marichi temple
Mausimaa Temple
Metakani Temple
Narayani Temple
Saptamatruka Temple
Sarala Temple
Siddha Bhairavi
Taratarini Temple
Upper Bagh Devi Temple
Sun temples
Biranchinarayan Temple, Buguda
Biranchinarayan Temple, Palia
Ganesha temples
Budha Ganesha Temple
Mahavinayak Temple
Siddha Vinayaka
Other temples
Bhandara Ghara Shrine
Hanuman Vatika
Harihara Deula
Joranda Gadhi

Shakti temples in Odisha
Shiva temples in Odisha
Temples in Bhubaneswar

Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Germany
Israel
United States





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jagannath_Temple,_Puri&oldid=1154585223"
Categories: Jagannath Temple ComplexChar Dham templesTemples dedicated to JagannathKrishna templesVishnu templesPurana temples of VishnuArchaeological monuments in OdishaHindu pilgrimage sites in IndiaPuriVaishnavismHidden categories: CS1 errors: missing titleCS1 errors: bare URLCS1 Hindi-language sources (hi)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: url-statusAll articles with bare URLs for citationsArticles with bare URLs for citations from May 2022Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citationsCS1 maint: archived copy as titleAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2022Articles with dead external links from June 2016Harv and Sfn no-target errorsArticles with permanently dead external linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from November 2021Use Indian English from November 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles needing additional references from March 2022All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Odia-language textCoordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2018Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2023Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022All articles with incomplete citationsArticles with incomplete citations from September 2018Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WorldCat identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiers






 This page was last edited on 13 May 2023, at 12:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





