



Barabati fort - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Location







2History







3Architecture







4See also







5References







6External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Barabati fort




4 languages



Catalàहिन्दीଓଡ଼ିଆதமிழ்
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Barabati Fort)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Barabati fort" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


Fort in CuttackBarabati FortEntrance of Barabati FortTypeFortLocationCuttackCoordinates20°29′4.67″N 85°51′51.93″E﻿ / ﻿20.4846306°N 85.8644250°E﻿ / 20.4846306; 85.8644250Coordinates: 20°29′4.67″N 85°51′51.93″E﻿ / ﻿20.4846306°N 85.8644250°E﻿ / 20.4846306; 85.8644250Height14.62 metersFounderOld fort by Marakata Keshari of Somavamshi (Keshari) dynasty New fort by King Anangabhima Deva III of Eastern Ganga dynasty (1211-1238)Built989 CE
 Majestic Main Entrance of Barbati Fort
Barabati Fort is a 987 CE fort built by Marakata Keshari of Somavamshi (Keshari) dynasty in Cuttack, Odisha.[1] The ruins of the fort remain with its moat, gate, and the earthen mound of the nine-storied palace, which evokes the memories of past days. Today it sits next to the modern Barabati Stadium, the venue of various sport events and cultural programs. There is also a temple dedicated to Katak Chandi, the presiding deity of the city, not far away from the fort. Now there are plans to develop the old Gadakhai into a world class tourist destination with boating facilities and a world class park. The renovation work of the Gadakhai is going on in full swing. Barabati fort
 Panoramic view of Barabati fort

Location[edit]
This medieval fort is situated at 20°29′1.32″N 85°52′3.36″E﻿ / ﻿20.4837000°N 85.8676000°E﻿ / 20.4837000; 85.8676000, about 8 km away from the center of the Cuttack, at the apex of a delta formed by the river Mahanadi on the north and its distributary, the Kathajodi on the south, and is located at 14.62 metres above sea level.

History[edit]
The Barabati was built in 987 CE by the Somavamshi dynasty lineage ruler Maharaja Markata Keshari while building a stone embankment to protect Cuttack which was known as Kataka at that time.
Scholars give different opinions regarding the date of construction of Barabati fort. Madalapanji, the Jagannatha temple chronicle narrates an interesting story which is as follows.
King Anangabhima Deva III of the Eastern Ganga dynasty lived in his capital, Chaudwar (1211-1238 A.D.) One day the king crossed the Mahanadi and came towards the southern side. Here he noticed in the Barabati village belonging to the Ko-danda sub-division that near the god Visweswar, a heron had jumped upon a hawk. Seeing this the king was very much surprised and on an auspicious day laid the foundation of construction of the fort and this village was named Barabati Cuttack. And after that he left Choudwar and lived at Cuttack making it his capital.
In 1568 AD, the city passed to the hands of Karranis of Bengal, then to the Mughal Empire in 1576[2] and then to the Maratha Empire in 1741.[3] Cuttack, with the rest of Odisha, came under British rule in 1803. The Bengal-Nagpur Railways connected Cuttack with Madras (Chennai) and Calcutta (Kolkata) in 1919. It became the capital of the newly formed state of Odisha in 1936 and continued to be so till 1948 when the capital was shifted to Bhubaneswar. The city completed one thousand years of its existence in 1989.
During the rule of the Muslims and the Marathas it continued to be the capital of Odisha. The British army took possession of Barabati fort in October 1803, and it became a prison for confinement of several illustrious rulers of the land. In 1800 the Raja of Kujanga, in 1818 the Raja of Surgaja with his family members were kept under strict confinement to this fort. In addition vandalism to destroy the fort was intensified in the early phase of British rule.

Architecture[edit]
 Bastions and ramparts of the fort
 Bastions and ramparts of the fort
 Barabati Fort - Ruins of the Nine Storied Complex and Elephant Stables
 Ruins of the Nine Storied Complex and Elephant Stables
The fort is square in plan. It spreads over an area of 102 acres and surrounded on all sides with a stone paved moat of 10 Mtr. width in northern and western sides and 20 Mtr. width in the eastern and southern sides. The entire fort wall except the entrance is missing. Since, 1915, in view of its national importance, the place has been declared as a protected site by Archaeological Survey of India.
At the centre of the fort there was a high mound with a tank in the western side. It spreads over 15/16 acres of area. Now the site is under extensive encroachment. To the east of the mound, there is the Shahi Mosque while in the west of the tank lies the mazar of Hazrat Ali Bukhari. In 1989 excavations were carried out by Archaeological Survey of India to ascertain the cultural horizon of the historic fort and the work is still in progress. Excavation by Archaeological survey of India on December 1st 1989 revealed evidence of a palace, a square structure built up of Khondalite stone. It was built over an area which was carefully prepared by filling up of 5 meter with sand and lime mixture. Trenches dug on the eastern side of the structure revealed 32 pillars built of literate blocks roughly square but varying in size.

 Mosque inside Barabati fort
 Mazar of Hazrat Sayed Ali Bukhari
 Mazar of Hazrat Sayed Ali Bukhari


In the northeastern corner of the mound remains of a temple have been found. Excavation on the eastern and southern side of the mound revealed the existence of a citadel wall built of laterite blocks.[4]
The ruins of the old Barabati Fort lie on the right bank of the Mahanadi, in the western part of the city. All that remains of the Fort is an arched gateway and the earthen mound of the nine-storeyed palace. Archaeological surveys reveal that the Fort was roughly rectangular in structure having an area of over 102 acres (0.41 km2), and it was surrounded on all sides by a wall of laterite and sandstones. To the west of the mound there is a tank. In the north-eastern corner of the mound are remains of what once was a temple. The temple was made of whitish sandstone over foundations of laterite blocks. About four hundred fragments of mouldings and some mutilated pieces of sculptures have been recovered so far. This temple of the Ganga period containing a stone idol of Lord Jagannath is in ruins. A mosque built by Nawab Murshid Quli Khan, governor of Emperor Aurangzeb in 1719 AD still exists.

See also[edit]
List of Monuments of National Importance in Odisha
References[edit]


^ "Barabati Fort". The Times of India.

^ Mountstuart Elphinstone, Edward Byles Cowell (1866). The History of India: The Hindú and Mahometan Periods (Public Domain). Murray.

^ Jaques, Tony (2007). Dictionary of Battles and Sieges: F-O. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 516. ISBN 9780313335389.

^ Orissa Historical Research Journal, Vol. XLVII. No. 2. Utkal University. 18 April 2016


History of Odisha by K.C. Panigrahi
External links[edit]
Barabati Fort, Cuttack
Barabati Fort
vte Forts in IndiaVijayanagara
Chandragiri
Gingee
Bangalore
Udayagiri
Vellore
Deccan sultanates
Ahmednagar
Daulatabad
Gawilghur
Golconda
Narnala
Panhala
Gujarat Sultanate
Bhadra
Delhi Sultanate
Aligarh
Bandhavgarh
Hathras
Qila Mubarak
Siri
Tughlaqabad
Salimgarh
Nayak dynasty
Chitradurga
Bekal
Dindigul
Gingee
Tiruchirapalli Rock
Chandragiri Fort
Hosdurg
Malwa Sultanate
Mandsaur
Mandavgadh
Faruqi dynasty
Asirgarh
Laling
Thalner
Rajputs
Achalgarh
Amber
Bhangarh
Chittor
Jaigarh
Jaisalmer
Jalore
Junagarh
Kankwadi
Kumbhalgarh
Nahargarh
Qila Rai Pithora
Taragarh
Lal Kot
Gwalior
Kalinjar
Hinglajgarh
Mehrangarh
Narwar
Senapati fortress
Sabalgarh
Bahu
Kangra
Ranthambore
Bhatner fort
Maratha Empire
Dongri
Harishchandragad
Kolaba
Lohagad
Sudhagad
Sinhagad
Tikona
Panhala
Pratapgad
Vishalgad
Rajgad
Sindhudurg
Vijaydurg
Shivneri
Raigad
Gajendragarh
Gingee
Shaniwar Wada
Jhansi
Hinglajgarh
Manora
Visapur
Sadashivgad
Mughal Empire
Purana Qila
Chanderi
Agra
Allahabad
Fatehpur Sikri
Red
Akola
Hari Parbat
Ramnagar
Jat
Bawana Fort
Gohad
Lohagarh
Nahar Singh Mahal
Kingdom of Mysore
Devanahalli
Palakkad
Bekal
Sankagiri
Siddi
Murud-Janjira
Belapur
Underi
Travancore
Vattakottai
Udayagiri
East
Portuguese
Bassein Fort
Bombay Castle
Mahim
Arnala
Castella de Aguada
Diu Fort
Surat Castle
Fortim do Mar, Diu
Fortim do Mar, Simbor
Emmanuel
Fort Anjediva
Korlai
Madh Fort
St Thomas, Tangasseri
St. Angelo
Pallipuram
Aguada
Fort Tiracol
Anjediva
Cranganore
Ghodbunder
Fortaleza de Chaul
Ponda Fort
Chapora Fort
Fortaleza de São Sebastião de Tivim
Cabo de Rama
Corjuem Fort
Mormugão fort
Rachol Fort
Fort of São Tiago of Banastarim
Sikh Empire
Jamrud
Kamlah
Multan
Harkishangarh
Lahore
British Raj
Anchuthengu
St. George
William
Bombay
Riwa
Worli
Mazagon
Sion Hillock
Sewri
Mahim
Tellicherry
St. David
Sur Empire
Chunar
Rohtasgarh
Munger
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Barabati
Raibania
Ahom dynasty
Talatal Ghar
Kareng Ghar
Rang Ghar
Garchuk Lachit Garh
Kakatiya dynasty
Warangal
Bahmani Sultanate
Bidar
Gulbarga





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barabati_fort&oldid=1149609326"
Categories: Buildings and structures in CuttackForts in OdishaMonuments of National Importance in OdishaTourist attractions in Cuttack districtHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2018All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from May 2018Use Indian English from May 2018All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataCoordinates on WikidataPages using infobox historic site with unknown parameters






 This page was last edited on 13 April 2023, at 09:01 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





