



Nandankanan Zoological Park - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History







2Animals and exhibits


				Toggle Animals and exhibits subsection
			




2.1Mammals







2.2Birds







2.3Reptiles and amphibians





2.3.1Reptiles







2.3.2Amphibians









2.4Aquaria







2.5Orchid house









3Breeding programs


				Toggle Breeding programs subsection
			




3.1White tigers







3.2Crocodilians







3.3Pangolins









4Adopt-an-Animal programme







5Gallery







6References







7External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Nandankanan Zoological Park




4 languages



Euskaraଓଡ଼ିଆᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤاردو
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Zoo and botanical garden in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India


Nandankanan Zoological ParkNandankanan Zoological Park20°24′00″N 85°48′53″E﻿ / ﻿20.399965°N 85.814703°E﻿ / 20.399965; 85.814703Coordinates: 20°24′00″N 85°48′53″E﻿ / ﻿20.399965°N 85.814703°E﻿ / 20.399965; 85.814703Date opened29 December 1960[1]LocationBhubaneswar, Odisha, IndiaLand area437 ha (1,080 acres)[2]No. of animals3517 (2019-03-31)[3]No. of species157 (2019)[3]Annual visitors3.2 million (April 2018 – März 2019)[3]MembershipsCZA,[4] WAZA,[5][6] SAZARCMajor exhibitsWhite Tiger Safari, Lion Safari, Butterfly Park, Orchid houseWebsitewww.nandankanan.org
Nandankanan Zoological Park is a 437-hectare (1,080-acre) zoo and botanical garden in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Established in 1960, it was opened to the public in 1979 and became the first zoo in India to join World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) in 2009. It also contains a botanical garden and part of it has been declared a sanctuary. Nandankanan, literally meaning The Garden of Heaven,[1] is located near the capital city, Bhubaneswar, in the environs of the Chandaka forest, and includes the 134-acre (54 ha) Kanjia lake.
A major upgrade was done in 2000 (after the damage caused by the super-cyclone of 1999 in coastal Odisha). More than 2.6 million visitors visit Nandankanan every year.[7]


History[edit]
Forest officials decided in 1960 that including rare plants and animals in the Odisha pavilion at the World Agricultural Fair in Delhi would help increase attendance. Word was sent to the forest department to capture as many small animals as possible for the display. In all, the forest department managed to capture two spotted deer (Axis axis), two barking deer (Muntiacus muntjak), two black buck (Antilope cervicapra), one mouse deer, one leopard cat, one flying squirrel, one racket-tailed drongo, one hornbill, two parrots, two hill mynah, one peacock, and a mongoose. In addition, the divisional forest officer of Deogarh captured a pangolin (scaly ant-eater) and two porcupines, and the divisional forest officer of Puri captured a pair of wild boars and a Python. All of these animals were delivered to the Delhi fair and exhibited at the Odisha pavilion.[8]
The State Finance Department raised objections to a zoo in Odisha because of the cost of both establishing and maintaining the facility. While the issue was being debated, animals arrived back at Bhubaneswar in May 1960, posing problems to the forest department for housing and feeding them. P. Mohandra (Divisional Forest Officer, Puri) and G. K. Das (Divisional Forest Officer, Deogarh) built temporary structures at Khandagiri for the animals, and the community of Jain helped feed them. Discussions about a real zoo started soon after Dr. H. K. Mahatab, then Chief Minister of Odisha, visited the animals.[8]
The initial proposal placed the zoo at Ghatikia close to Khandagiri and Udayagiri caves. However, this was deemed to pose water problems in the future. A zoo needs lot of water to meet the need of animals, cleaning of animals sheds and for various other purposes. The then Range Officer, Chandaka suggested Jujhagarh forest block on Kanjia lake near Barang Railway station as the most ideal location. The then Chief Conservator of Forests, Divisional Forest Officer, Puri, Range Officer, Chandaka and D.P. Ghosh, Forest Ranger visited the place and were impressed with its scenic beauty. Kanjia lake with its vast expanse over 125 acres low and undulating hills of Jujhagarh and Krushnanagar D.P.F.S. with lush green vegetation on both sides of the lake presented a picturesque site. Jujhagarh Forest Block had all the advantages for locating the zoo except communication from Bhubaneswar and the only approach was via Chandaka covering a distance of 38 km.
A committee consisting of Dr. Radhanath Rath, Sri G.C. Dash and Sri D.N. Choudhury, the then Minister of Forests, Secretary, Forest and the Chief Conservator of Forests, respectively, visited the place. They were very much impressed with its aesthetic beauty and recommended location of the zoo there with construction of a straight road (a distance of 14 to 15 km) from Bhubaneswar. Accordingly, it was decided to locate the Zoological Park in Jujhagarh Forest Block, Botanical garden in Krushnanagar Forest Block and develop Kanjia lake for Boating and Angling. The Director, Fisheries agreed to develop a portion of the lake for rearing various kinds of fish for visitors to see. Initially it was decided to keep spotted deer, barking deer, black bucks, wild boars, sambars, nilagai and bears in spacious enclosures. Other animals like leopard cat, mongoose, flying squirrel, porcupine, python, monkeys, hyena, jackal, civet cat, pangolin, jungle cat, parrots, mynah and other birds in suitable cages. It was decided to put efforts to capture tigers and leopards which could be exhibited in suitable cages for the time being and the suitable spacious enclosures would be built for them later on. It was also decided to raise a good flower garden and to plant important species and medicinal plants of Odisha inside proposed Botanical garden in Krushnanagar D.P.F. Eventually the site around the 134-acre (54 ha) Kanjia Lake was chosen. The lake would be developed for recreation as well. A 15-kilometre (9.3 mi) road was built to the site, and Nandankanan Biological Park was officially inaugurated on 29 December 1960, by Sri S. K. Patil, then Indian Minister of Food and Agriculture.[8]
A botanical garden was opened in 1963. The first tiger arrived at the zoo in 1964 from the Alipore Zoo in Calcutta, along with a pair of African lions, a pair of Mugger crocodiles, and a puma. The facility was renamed Nandankanan Zoological Park in 1981.[8]
In 2009 Nandankanan Zoological Park became the first zoo in India to become a member of the World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA).[5]

Animals and exhibits[edit]
The zoo is home to about 1660 individual animals representing 166 species, including 67 species of mammals, 81 species of birds, and 18 species of reptiles.[9] The death rate of animals here during the 2008–2009 fiscal year was one of the lowest in India, at 3.1% per year compared to the national average of 10%.[10][11]

Mammals[edit]
African lion
Assam macaque
Asian palm civet
Asiatic lion
Barasingha
Bengal fox
Bengal tiger
Blackbuck
Black-tufted marmoset
Bonnet macaque
Chimpanzee
Chinkara
Chital
Common squirrel monkey
Dhole
Four-horned antelope
Gaur
Giraffe
Golden jackal
Hamadryas baboon
Himalayan black bear
Hippopotamus
Honey badger
Indian crested porcupine
Indian elephant
Indian flying fox
Indian giant squirrel
Indian grey mongoose
Indian hare
Indian hog deer
Indian muntjac
Indian pangolin
Indian wolf
Indian leopard
Jungle cat
Lion-tailed macaque
Nilgai
Red-handed tamarin
Rhesus macaque
Sambar deer
Sangai
Sloth bear
Small Indian civet
Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain
Striped hyena
Stump-tailed macaque
Tufted capuchin
Wild boar
Birds[edit]
The zoo has a large number of native and exotic birds, including:

Alexandrine parakeet
Asian koel
Asian openbill
Barbary dove
Barn owl
Black-crowned night heron
Black-headed ibis
Black kite
Black swan
Black-throated finch
Blossom-headed parakeet
Brahminy kite
Brown fish owl
Brown-throated parakeet
Budgerigar
Cattle egret
Chattering lory
Cinereous vulture
Cockatiel
Coconut lorikeet
Common emerald dove
Common hill myna
Common ostrich
Diamond dove
Eastern rosella
Emu
Eurasian spoonbill
Fischer's lovebird
Golden pheasant
Great egret
Green-cheeked parakeet
Grey heron
Grey parrot
Indian grey hornbill
Indian peafowl
Indian vulture
Intermediate egret
Jandaya parakeet
Java sparrow
Lady Amherst's pheasant
Laughing dove
Lesser adjutant
Little egret
Livingstone's turaco
Mandarin duck
Masked lovebird
Meyer's parrot
Oriental scops owl
Painted stork
Rainbow lorikeet
Red-and-green macaw
Red avadavat
Red-bellied parrot
Red junglefowl
Reeves's pheasant
Ring-necked dove
Rose-ringed parakeet
Rosy-faced lovebird
Rosy pelican
Sarus crane
Scaly-breasted munia
Shikra
Silver pheasant
Society finch
Spot-billed pelican
Spotted dove
Star finch
Sun parakeet
Sunda zebra finch
Tricoloured munia
Violet turaco
White cockatoo
White-rumped vulture
Woolly-necked stork
Yellow-crested cockatoo
Reptiles and amphibians[edit]
 Python
The Zoo has a reptile house, with a cave-like entrance guarded by a life-size replica of aTyrannosaurus rex.[12] This houses the majority of the zoo's reptiles and amphibians, including:

Reptiles[edit]
Asian forest tortoise
Asian water monitor
Banded krait
Bengal monitor
Burmese python
Common krait
Cuvier's dwarf caiman
Ganges softshell turtle
Green iguana
Indian chameleon
Indian cobra
Indian flapshell turtle
Indian narrow-headed softshell turtle
Indian python
Indian tent turtle
Indian sand boa
Indian star tortoise
King cobra
Monocled cobra
Morelet's crocodile
Mugger crocodile
Nile crocodile
Oriental ratsnake
Reticulated python
Russell's boa
Russell's viper
Saltwater crocodile
Siamese crocodile
Yellow anaconda
Amphibians[edit]
Chunam tree frog
Green pond frog
Indian skipper frog
Indus Valley bullfrog
Marbled toad
Aquaria[edit]
The zoo includes 34 aquaria which are home to a large variety of freshwater fish

Orchid house[edit]
The zoo will have the largest orchid house of Odisha soon spreading over 5,000 square feet (460 m2). In Odisha alone, 130 species of orchids have been documented to date.[13]

Breeding programs[edit]
The zoo enjoys a good reputation internationally for successfully breeding black panthers, gharials, and white tigers in captivity.[14]

White tigers[edit]
 White tiger in the Zoo
Three white tigers were born in the Nandankanan Zoo in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India in 1980. Their parents were an orange father–daughter pair called Deepak and Ganga, who were not related to Mohan or any other captive white tiger. One of their wild-caught ancestors would have carried the recessive white gene, and it showed up when Deepak was mated to his daughter. Deepak's sister also turned out to be a white gene carrier. These white tigers are therefore referred to as the Odisha strain, as opposed to the Rewa strain, of white tigers founded by Mohan.[15][16][17][18][19]
When the surprise birth of three white cubs occurred there was a white tigress already living at the zoo, named Diana, from the Delhi Zoo. One of the three was later bred to her creating another blend of two unrelated strains of white tigers. This lineage resulted in several white tigers in Nandankanan Zoo. Today the Nandankanan Zoo has the largest collection of white tigers in India. The Cincinnati Zoo acquired two female white tigers from the Nandankanan Zoo, in the hopes of establishing a line of pure-Bengal white tigers in America, but they never got a male, and didn't receive authorization from the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA)'s Species Survival Plan (SSP) to breed them. The Zoo Outreach Organisation used to publish studbooks for white tigers, which were compiled by A.K. Roychoudhury of the Bose Institute in Calcutta, and subsidized by the Humane Society of India.[20] The Columbus Zoo had also hoped to breed pure-Bengal white tigers, but were unable to obtain a white registered Bengal mate for Rewati from India.[21]
There were also surprise births of white tigers in the Asian Circus, in India, to parents not known to have been white gene carriers, or heterozygotes, and not known to have any relationship to any other white tiger strains. There was a female white cub born at Mysore Zoo in 1984, from orange parents, descended from Deepak's sister. The white cub's grandmother, Thara, came from the Nandankanan Zoo in 1972. Mysore Zoo had a second female white tiger cub from New Delhi Zoo in 1984. On 29 August 1979, a white tigress named Seema was dispatched to Kanpur Zoo to be bred to Badal, a tiger who was a fourth generation descendant of Mohan and Begum. The pair did not breed so it was decided to pair Seema with one of two wild-caught, notorious man-eaters, either Sheru or Titu, from the Jim Corbett National Park. Seema and Sheru produced a white cub, and for a while, it was thought there might be white genes in Corbett's population of tigers, but the cub didn't stay white.[22][23]
There have been other cases of white tiger, white lion, and white panther cubs being born, and then changing to normal colour. White tigers which were a mixture of the Rewa and Odisha strains, born at the Nandankanan Zoo, were non-inbred. A white tiger from out of the Odisha strain found its way to the Taronga Western Plains Zoo in Australia. Australia's Dreamworld, on the Gold Coast, wanted to breed this tiger to one of their white tigers from the United States.

Crocodilians[edit]
 Crocodile
Captive breeding units of all the three crocodilian species have been established at Nandankanan Zoo.[24] In 1980, the gharial was bred in captivity for the first time at the Nandankanan Biological Park in Odisha. This successful effort involved the collaboration and coordination between international and national zoological parks. The male came from the Frankfurt zoo and the females were from the Nandankanan and Trivandrum zoos. A large part of the credit for this first time ex-situ breeding in captivity goes to the meticulous planning and designing of the breeding enclosure at the Nandankanan Zoo by Dr. H. R. Bustard, which simulates the gharial's natural habitat of a deep flowing river with adequate high-rise sandbanks. The breeding enclosure, together with a judicious mix of adult size classes to form a social group, minimal disturbance and provision of natural food culminated in that success story, which continues to the present date. The Nandankanan Biological park has since provided many zoos around the world with captive-bred gharials for display and education.[25] Muggers bred at Nandankanan Zoo have also been released in Satkosia Gorge.

Pangolins[edit]
The zoo was the first in India to successfully breed pangolins. In a programme started before the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) pangolin breeding programme, the zoo authorities started the programme in the nocturnal centre of the animal park. There are 10 pangolins in Nandankanan Zoo, including six females.[26]

Adopt-an-Animal programme[edit]
 Asiatic lion in the zoo
To help involve the general public in animal conservation and raise money, the zoo started the Adopt-an-Animal programme in 2008 for all of its animals.[27][28] Adopters receive a customized adoption certificate and one free entry ticket for each animal adopted. In addition, the adopter's name is displayed on a special board and a special mention made in the annual report of the zoo.[29] Adopters can pay from ₹500 for a small bird to ₹100,000 for a tiger for a year. The zoo authorities have made available two of the most attractive sites for adoption which are the Lion Safari and Tiger Safari for which the adoption cost is ₹1,000,000 and ₹500,000 respectively. Although other zoos also have adoption programs, Nandankanan was the first zoo to get a tax exemption under section 80G of the Income Tax Act.[30] Funds received under the program are used to support the zoo's care and services for all its inhabitants by providing quality food to meet their nutritional requirements, medical care, equipment, enclosure upgrades, and biodiversity enrichment. The parents of two students Sristi and Prakriti from Cuttack were the first to adopt, paying ₹4,000 to adopt a blue and yellow macaw.[31] The State Bank of India donated ₹500,000 to adopt six endangered animals including a one-horned rhinoceros, white Bengal tiger, chimpanzee, and an orangutan.[32] The Confidence Factory, near Bhubaneswar, adopted a Royal Bengal Tigress Rebati in 2012.[33][34]

Gallery[edit]




Royal Bengal tiger






Bengal Tiger






Emu






Gharials






Herd of hippopotami






Monitor lizard






Giraffe






Leopard






Tortoise






Orangutan






Rose-ringed Parrot






Crocodile






Python






Mandarin duck






Langur




References[edit]


^ a b "Nandankanan Zoo". travelchacha.com. travelChaCha. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Nandankanan Biological Park". zandavisitor.com. Zoo and Aquarium Visitor. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 12 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b c "Nandankanan Zoo Annual Report 2018-19" (PDF).

^ 
"Search Establishment". cza.nic.in. CZA. Retrieved 2 July 2011.

^ a b "Nandankanan now a member of world zoo body". worldzootoday.com. World Zoo Today. 4 July 2009. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 10 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ 
"Zoos and Aquariums of the World". waza.org. WAZA. Retrieved 12 April 2011.

^ "Nandankanan - Annual Report - 2019-20" (PDF). nandankanan.org. p. 19. Retrieved 14 April 2021.

^ a b c d "History". nandankanan.org. Nandankanan. Archived from the original on 2 February 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 2 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Annual Animal Inventory" (PDF). nandankanan.org.

^ 
"Nandankanan Zoo". thehindubusinessline.com. The Hindu Business Line. 1 February 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ "Orissa's Nandankanan Zoo recorded lowest mortality rate in India". orissadiary.com. OrissaDiary.com. 26 May 2009. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Multiple funding sources to help further develop various tourist attractions and infrastructure in the coastal areas". Telegraph.

^ "Nandankanan to have State's largest orchid house". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ 
"Nandankanan Zoo". khordha.nic.in. Khorda. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ Roychoudhury, A.K. (1987) Chapter 34 "White Tigers And Their Conservation", Part IV "White Tiger Politics", Tigers Of The World, The Biology, Biopolitics, Management And Conservation Of An Endangered Species, Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, New Jersey USA

^ Roychoudhury, A.K.; L.N. Acharjyo (1983). "Origin of white tigers at Nandankanan Biological Park, Orissa". Indian J. Exp. Biol. 21 (6): 350–52. PMID 6667990.

^ Roychoudhury, A.K. (1990). "A Genetic Analysis Of The White Tigers In The Nandankanan Bio Park, Orissa". Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society.

^ Roychoudhury A.K. "White tigers of Nandankanan lineage". Zoos' Print Journal. 4 (3): 12–3.

^ Rai, Usha (15 March 1987) "Will they outlast this century?" Times of India, New Delhi

^ Roychoudhury A.K. (1989). "About studbook of white tigers in India". Zoos' Print Journal. 4: 8–9.

^ Ferguson, David A., & Kohl, Steven G. (1987) Developing International Conservation Programs, Tigers Of The World, Noyes Publications Park Ridge, New Jersey USA

^ Roychoudhury, A.K. (1989) The Indian White Tiger Studbook, Zoo Zen, International Zoo Outreach Org., Tamil Nadu, India

^ The first captive-bred white tigers. zoopros.com

^ Crocodile Conservation. wildlifeorissa.in

^ Ex-Situ conservation – Crocodile Breeding in Indian Zoos BC Choudhury. wii.gov.in

^ "Nandankanan Zoo records first captive-bred pango". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ "Nandankanan Zoo to start Adopt-an-Animal scheme soon". orissadiary.com. OrissaDiary.com. 23 March 2008. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ 
"Adoption of animals begins in Nandankanan zoo". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 22 October 2008. Archived from the original on 12 September 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ "Nandankanan offers for adoption of inmates". Orissa.in. Orissa Network. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 9 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine

^ 
"Adopt an Animal, Get Tax Relief" (PDF). india.gov.in. Government of India. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ 
"Nandankanan Zoo launches adopt-an-animal scheme". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 25 October 2008. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ "SBI adopts animals of Nandankanan Zoo". mynews.in. MyNews. 18 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2011. Archived 11 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ Singha, Minati (23 July 2012). "Private company adopts tigress at Nandankanan Zoological Park". indiatimes.com. The Times of India. Retrieved 20 January 2013.

^ "Adopt an animal". 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2016.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nandankanan Zoological Park.

Official website
Official website of: "Central Zoo Authority of India" (CZA), Government of India
Animals in the zoo
vteZoos and Safari parks of IndiaZoos
Gorewada Zoo
Alipore Zoological Gardens
Allen Forest Zoo
Amirthi Zoological Park
Arignar Anna Zoological Park
Bannerghatta Biological Park
Chhatbir Zoo
Chennai Snake Park
Gopalpur Zoo
Gulab Bagh and Zoo
Guwahati Zoo
Indira Gandhi Zoological Park
Jawaharlal Nehru Biological Park
Jaipur Zoo
Jijamata Udyaan
Lucknow Zoo
Madras Crocodile Bank
Marble Palace Zoo
Mysore Zoo
Nandankanan Zoological Park
National Zoological Park
Nehru Zoological Park
G. B. Pant High Altitude Zoo
Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park
Parassinikkadavu Snake Park
Sajjangarh Biological Park
Sakkarbaug Zoological Garden
Sandish Compound
Sanjay Gandhi Jaivik Udyan
Sipahijola Wildlife Sanctuary
Sri Venkateswara Zoological Park
Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park
Thrissur Zoo
Thiruvananthapuram Zoo
Warangal Zoo
Smart Zoo
Gorewada Zoo
Indore Zoo
Mysore Zoo
Safari Park
Gorewada Zoo
Etawah Safari Park
Tiger and Lion Safari
Aquariums
Bangalore Aquarium
Taraporewala Aquarium
Organisations
Central Zoo Authority of India
Zoo Outreach Organisation
Wildlife Institute of India
Indian Institute of Forest Management
South Asian Zoo Association for Regional Cooperation
Related lists
Botanical gardens in India
Wildlife sanctuaries of India
 Animals portal
vteProtected areas of OdishaBiosphere reserves
Simlipal Biosphere Reserve
National parks
Bhitarkanika
Similipal
Wildlife sanctuaries
Baisipalli
Balimela
Balukhand-Konark
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Chandaka
Debrigarh
Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary
Hadgarh
Kapilasa
Karlapat
Kondakameru
Kotgarh
Kuldiha
Lakhari Valley
Nandankanan
Saptasajya
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Ushakothi
Bird sanctuaries
Chilika Lake
Nalbana Bird Sanctuary
Zoos
Nandankanan Zoological Park
Protected areas of India
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
United States





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nandankanan_Zoological_Park&oldid=1143709639"
Categories: Zoos in IndiaTourist attractions in OdishaTourist attractions in BhubaneswarParks in Bhubaneswar1960 establishments in OrissaZoos established in 1960Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse dmy dates from October 2016Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on WikidataCoordinates on WikidataCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WorldCat identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersPages using the Kartographer extension






 This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 12:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





