



Bhitarkanika National Park - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Wildlife


				Toggle Wildlife subsection
			




1.1Flora







1.2Fauna









2Attractions







3References







4External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Bhitarkanika National Park




17 languages



বাংলাभोजपुरीEspañolEuskaraFrançaisहिन्दीಕನ್ನಡമലയാളംमराठीNederlandsଓଡ଼ିଆپنجابیРусскийதமிழ்తెలుగుاردوTiếng Việt
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


National park in Odisha, India
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Bhitarkanika National Park" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Bhitarkanika National Park Odisha(Odia: ଭିତରକନିକା ଜାତୀୟ ଉଦ୍ୟାନ)IUCN category II (national park)Sunrise at Bhitarkanika National ParkLocationKendrapara district, OdishaNearest cityChandbaliCoordinates20°45′N 87°0′E﻿ / ﻿20.750°N 87.000°E﻿ / 20.750; 87.000Coordinates: 20°45′N 87°0′E﻿ / ﻿20.750°N 87.000°E﻿ / 20.750; 87.000Area145 km2 (56 sq mi)Established16 September 1998Governing bodyMinistry of Environment and Forests, Government of Indiawww.bhitarkanikanationalpark.com
Bhitarkanika National Park is a 145 km2 (56 sq mi) large national park in northeast Kendrapara district in Odisha in eastern India. It was designated on 16 September 1998 and obtained the status of a Ramsar site on 19 August 2002. The area is also been designated as second Ramsar site of the State after the Chilika Lake. It is surrounded by Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary, which spread over 672 km2 (259 sq mi).
Gahirmatha Beach and Marine Sanctuary are to the east, separating swamp region and mangroves from the Bay of Bengal.
The national park and wildlife sanctuary is inundated by the rivers Brahmani, Baitarani, Dhamra, Pathsala. It hosts many mangrove species, and is the second largest mangrove ecosystem in India.
The national park is home to Saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus), Indian python, king cobra, black ibis, darters and many other species of flora and fauna.[1]


Wildlife[edit]
Flora[edit]
Main article: Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Mangroves are salt-tolerant, complex, and dynamic plants that occur in tropical and subtropical intertidal regions. They are adapted to rising and lowering of tides throughout the day, with roots designed like “stilts”, enabling the plant and its leaves to photosynthesise adequately without being submerged. They have also evolved to tolerate fluctuating salinity levels throughout the day’s tides. The tall, supportive roots create baluarte hiding spots under the water for fish and small aquatic animals, and often act as fish “nurseries” for young fry to seek refuge in. Bhitarkanika is one such location of rich, vibrant mangrove ecosystem, lying in the estuarine region of Brahmani - Baitarani in the North-Eastern corner of Kendrapara district of Odisha. The area is intersected by a network of creeks with the Bay of Bengal on the East. The alley between the meandering creeks and rivers houses the second-largest mangrove ecosystem in India.
An area of 145 km² has been notified as Bhitarkanika National Park vide Notification No.19686/F in September 1998 by the government of Odisha. It has much significance for researchers surrounding ecological, geomorphological, and biological issues. The landscape contains varied environments, including mangrove swamps, rivers, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inland floodplains, forested beaches, and mudflats.
Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary was declared vide notification No.6958/FF AH on 22 April 1975 over an area of 672 km². The Sanctuary comprises vast mangrove forests, meandering rivers and creeks leading to tidal deltas - all of which provide valuable refuge to the vulnerable saltwater crocodile. The prominent floral species include Mangrove species, casuarinas, and reed grasses like the indigo bush and Arundo donax.

Fauna[edit]
 A crocodile is sleeping in the swamp area of Bhitarkanika national park
 Spotted deer at Bhitarkanika National Park
The park is home to the saltwater crocodile, Indian python, black ibis, wild boar, rhesus monkey, chital, darter, cobra, monitor lizard. Olive ridley turtles nest on Gahirmatha and other nearby beaches. Bhitarkanika has one of the largest populations of endangered saltwater crocodile in India and is globally unique in that, 10% of the adults exceed 6 m length.
Nearly 1671 saltwater crocodiles inhabit the rivers and creeks.[2]
Around 3,000 saltwater crocodiles were born during 2014 annual breeding and nesting season.[3]
In 2006, Guinness World Records accepted claims of a 7.1 m (23 ft 4 in), 2,000 kg (4,400 lb) male saltwater crocodile living within Bhitarkanika National Park.[4] Due to the difficulty of trapping and measuring a large living crocodile, the accuracy of these dimensions is yet to be verified. These observations and estimations have been made by park officials over the course of ten years, from 2006 to 2016, however, regardless of the skill of the observers it cannot be compared to a verified tape measurement, especially considering the uncertainty inherent in visual size estimation in the wild.[5] According to the park report in 2006, there were 203 adults, of which 16 measured over 4.9 m (16 ft 1 in); 5 of these 5.5 to 6.1 m (18 ft 1 in to 20 ft 0 in), and 3 over 6.1 m (20 ft 0 in), as well as the preserved skeleton of a 6.0 m (19 ft 8 in) specimen which died one year earlier.[6] A significant figure, since individuals over 5 m (16 ft 5 in) are considered rare,[7] making the Bhitarkanika Park a suitable habitat for large individuals. The most recently published official park report shows an increase of adult crocodiles to 308 individuals, as well as a steady increase over the years.[8][9] In the future, if conservation efforts pay off, these large individuals could be more common.[10]
Per the 2014 survey of mammals, the first of its kind to be undertaken in the forest and wetland sites of the park; 1,872 spotted deer and 1,213 wild boar have made the forest areas their home. The census breakup of other mammals is monkeys: 1,522, jackals: 305, common langur: 39, otter: 38, sambar deer: 17, jungle cat: 11, fox: 10, Mongoose: 7, wolf: 7, and fishing cats: 12.[11]
Avifauna includes 320 species, including eight kingfisher species. Birds such as Asian open bill, cormorants, darters, black ibis, and egrets are frequently seen in the park. Every year close to 120,000 winter visitors from abroad for wintering and 80,000 resident birds from different parts of India arrive for nesting during the monsoon season.[12]
In 2023, 179 Mangrove pittas were recorded.[13]

Attractions[edit]
 The white crocodile of Bhitakanika National Park
It is a well-known place to observe the giant saltwater crocodile, some growing to 23 feet in length, along with other semi-aquatic reptiles like the Asian water monitor, and numerous snakes. Spotted axis deer (chital) and Eurasian wild boar are abundant in the park and can be spotted at all the major sites. Eight varieties of kingfisher are found here and can be found along the many creeks and riverine systems within the park.
The boat ride from Khola to Dangmal is quite popular, being that Khola is one of the gateways into the park. This route travels along a man-made creek as it passes through dense mangrove forests, providing a glimpse into the estuarine ecosystem and its wealth of fauna. The best time to travel through this creek is early morning or before sunset.
Bhitarkanika has a very rich historical and cultural past. It used to be the hunting grounds of the erstwhile King of Kanika. The hunting towers and artificial watering holes can be seen at many places, including Bhitarkanika Trail and at Dangmal. It is also the home of medieval Hindu temples, found dotted throughout the sanctuary, yet the major attraction remains the wildlife.

References[edit]


^ "Bhitarkanika Wetlands of Odisha, India| Saving Wetlands". Saving Wetlands. 2017. Retrieved 2017-09-13.

^ "WWF India - Bhitarkanika Mangroves". Archived from the original on 2010-02-24. Retrieved 2010-04-09. Crocodiles in Bhitarakanika]

^ "Increased number of croc hatchlings in Bhitarkanika". Business Standard India. Business Standard. Press Trust of India. 26 August 2014. Retrieved 19 September 2014.

^ Mishra, Braja Kishore (14 June 2006). "World's Largest Reptile Found in India". ohmynews.com. Archived from the original on 8 January 2008.

^ Bayliss, P. (1987). Survey methods and monitoring within crocodile management programmes. Surrey Beatty & Sons, Chipping Norton, pages 157–175

^ "Bhitarkanika is home to the largest Crocodiles in the world". oneindia.com. Retrieved 2015-06-03.

^ Britton, Adam. "Crocodylus porosus (Schneider, 1801)". The Crocodilian Species List. Archived from the original on 8 January 2006.

^ "Rise in estuarine crocodile populations in Bhitarkanika, Odisha". Zee News. 15 January 2015. Retrieved 2015-06-03.

^ "Crocodile". Bhitarkanika.org.

^ Grigg, G., & Kirshner, D. (2015). Biology and Evolution of Crocodylians. CSIRO PUBLISHING.

^ "3000 spotted deer and wild boars in Bhitarkanika". Zee News. 16 September 2014. Retrieved 19 September 2014.

^ "Migratory Birds arrive at Bhitarkanika National Park in Odisha". IANS. news.biharprabha.com. Retrieved 20 June 2014.

^ "Bhitarkanika home to 179 Mangrove Pitta birds". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 20 April 2023.


External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Bhitarkanika National Park.

 Media related to Bhitarkanika National Park at Wikimedia Commons

vteProtected areas of OdishaBiosphere reserves
Simlipal Biosphere Reserve
National parks
Bhitarkanika
Similipal
Wildlife sanctuaries
Baisipalli
Balimela
Balukhand-Konark
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Chandaka
Debrigarh
Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary
Hadgarh
Kapilasa
Karlapat
Kondakameru
Kotgarh
Kuldiha
Lakhari Valley
Nandankanan
Saptasajya
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Ushakothi
Bird sanctuaries
Chilika Lake
Nalbana Bird Sanctuary
Zoos
Nandankanan Zoological Park
Protected areas of India
vteNational parks of India
Protected areas of India
Ministry of Environment and Forests (India)
Andaman andNicobar Islands
Campbell Bay
Galathea
Mahatma Gandhi
Middle Button Island
Mt. Harriet Island
North Button Island
Rani Jhansi
Saddle Peak
South Button Island
  Andhra Pradesh
Sri Venkateswara
Papikonda
Arunachal Pradesh
Mouling
Namdapha
Assam
Dibru-Saikhowa
Dehing Patkai
Kaziranga
Manas
Nameri
Orang
Raimona
Bihar
Valmiki
Chhattisgarh
Indravati
Kanger Ghati
Goa
Mollem
Gujarat
Blackbuck
Gir
Gulf of Kutch
Vansda
Haryana
Kalesar
Sultanpur
Himachal Pradesh
Great Himalayan
Pin Valley
Khirganga
Jammu & Kashmir
Dachigam
Salim Ali National Park
Kishtwar
Overa-Aru
Hirpora
Hokersar
Laddakh
Hemis
Jharkhand
Betla
Karnataka
Anshi
Bandipur
Bannerghatta
Kundremukh
Nagarhole
Kerala
Anamudi Shola
Eravikulam
Mathikettan Shola
Pampadam Shola
Periyar
Silent Valley
Madhya Pradesh
Bandhavgarh
Fossil
Kanha
Kuno
Madhav
Panna
Pench
Sanjay
Satpura
Van Vihar
Maharashtra
Chandoli
Gilbert Hill
Gugamal
Karnala
Navegaon
Pench
Sanjay Gandhi
Tadoba
Manipur
Keibul Lamjao
Sirohi
Meghalaya
Balphakram
Nokrek
Mizoram
Murlen
Phawngpui
Nagaland
Intangki
Odisha
Bhitarkanika
Simlipal
Rajasthan
Darrah
Desert
Keoladeo
Ranthambhore
Sariska
Sikkim
Khangchendzonga
Tamil Nadu
Guindy
Gulf of Mannar
Anamalai
Mudumalai
Mukurthi
Palani Hills
Telangana
Kasu Brahmananda Reddy
Mahavir Harina Vanasthali
Mrugavani
Tripura
Clouded Leopard
Rajbari
Uttar Pradesh
Dudhwa
Uttarakhand
Jim Corbett
Gangotri
Govind Pashu Vihar
Nanda Devi
Rajaji
Valley of Flowers
West Bengal
Buxa
Gorumara
Neora Valley
Singalila
Sundarbans
Jaldapara

Category





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bhitarkanika_National_Park&oldid=1150974401"
Categories: IUCN Category IINational parks in OdishaProtected areas established in 19751975 establishments in OrissaHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from October 2018All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing additional references from October 2018All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Odia-language textCoordinates on WikidataCommons category link from Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 21 April 2023, at 04:19 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





