



Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Wildlife







2Avifauna







3Tiger reserve status







4Sunabeda campaigns







5Threats and conservation issues







6Gallery







7References







8External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary




1 language



हिन्दी
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Sunabeda Tiger Reserve)
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary [1]IUCN category IV (habitat/species management area)A Cliff in Sunabeda wildlife SanctuaryLocationOdisha, IndiaNearest cityNuapadaCoordinates20°27′15″N 82°29′52″E﻿ / ﻿20.454270°N 82.497678°E﻿ / 20.454270; 82.497678Coordinates: 20°27′15″N 82°29′52″E﻿ / ﻿20.454270°N 82.497678°E﻿ / 20.454270; 82.497678Area600 square kilometres (230 sq mi) [2]Established1988www.wildlife.odisha.gov.in/WebPortal/PA_Sunabeda.aspx
Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary is a wildlife sanctuary and a proposed tiger reserve located in the Nuapada district of Odisha, adjoining Chhattisgarh. It has a total area of 600 km2 (230 sq mi). The sanctuary harbours a great diversity of wildlife habitats, with a vast plateau, multiple valleys, gorges and magnificent waterfalls. The sanctuary forms the catchment area of the Jonk River, over which a dam has been constructed to facilitate irrigation. The Indra nullah and Udanti River lies to the south of the sanctuary. The important vegetation of the site comprises dry deciduous tropical forest.


Wildlife[edit]
 A beautiful watering hole in the sanctuary
 Crested Serpent Eagle at Cherchuan entry point
Typical central Indian wild mammals such as tiger (Panthera tigris), leopard (P. pardus), Indian Gaur (Bos gaurus), sloth bear (Melursus ursinus), barking deer (Muntiacus muntjak), wild boar (Sus scrofa) and blue bull (Boselaphus tragocamelus) are found, although depleted by poaching. Among the non-human primates, common langur (Semnopithecus entellus) and rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) are very common. (Kotwal 1997).
Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary has certainly seen better days. It had swamp deer (Cervus duvauceli branderi) and Wild water buffalo (Bubalus arnee).  Forests around Sunabeda used to have good numbers of Wild Buffalos till 1960s. Hunting, cattle borne disease and habitat destruction led to extinction of Wild Buffalo in the region. Unconfirmed and occasional movement of individuals are reported sometime near Sitanadi but that’s just a speculation. With the efforts of Chhattisgarh government, there is some chance that we could get back wild buffaloes in forests of Indravati and Sitanadi-Udanti but situation continues to be precarious.
Same is the case of hardground Barasingha which were once seen on the plateaus till 1950s and they just vanished, wild buffaloes way. Today they are extinct and there is no chance of revival.
Sunabeda is perhaps the only place left in Odisha which is now reporting Nilgai. They were in plenty earlier in the Sunabeda plateau but poaching has taken a toll over the years. Today they have also gone nocturnal. These all factors have resulted in dwindling big cat population. Due to scarcity of prey, cattle kills will go up in coming days and subsequently complete eradication of the big cats.

Avifauna[edit]
Around 200 species of birds have been reported from this area (H.K. Bisht in litt. 2002). BirdLife International (undated) has listed 59 species in biome-11 (Indo-Malayan tropical dry zone), of which 18 have been seen till now, but more are likely to occur. Except for the two Gyps vultures, which are now included in the critically endangered category by BirdLife International (2001) due to their steep decline during the last 10 years, none of the other species is threatened with extinction.
Biome-11 includes a wide range of habitats, including forests and open country. Many of the species listed have adapted to man-modified habitats. Some species have deviated so far from their earlier distribution that they may not be useful in identifying IBAs for the protection of this biome (BirdLife International, undated).
Forest Owlet: In February 1877, Valentine Ball had collected the specimen of Forest Owlet (Athene blewitti) on the banks of River Udanti towards the southern boundary of Sunabeda sanctuary. This fact should have been a great motivator for the foresters and officers in the region to look out for this species which till recently was thought to be extinct from India until its reappearance in Satpuda region in 1997.  Search for this specie continues and avifauna lovers are much hopeful that one day, the elusive Forest Owlet reappears in the last remaining Teak patches in the forests of Khariar. Teak patches are favored by the Forest owlet. If that happens, that would be the biggest boost for the region including the cause of tiger.
About other important species:
The region also is one of the best places in Odisha to see Red collared Doves, Bonellis Eagle, and Common Babblers which is not very common in Odisha barring few records. We also have recorded a plethora of species that supports the fact that Sunabeda forests are an abode to a wide range of avifauna diversity. Some of the species that has been documented include Indian Pitta, Banded bay Cuckoo, Indian Paradise Flycatchers, Jungle Owlet, Tickell’s Flycatcher, Sulphur bellied warbler etc. Based on historical records, the search for Chestnut bellied Sandgrouse and Indian Courser continues which are no more found in Odisha

Tiger reserve status[edit]
Sunabeda has received 'in-principle-approval' of the National Tiger Conservation Authority, proposals for its notification as per NTCA-guidelines is under preparation. The proposed tiger reserve extends over 956.17 km2 (longitude - 82°20'0" to 82°34'48" east and latitude 20°06'0" to 20°44'0" north), in Nuapada district bordering the state of Chhattisgarh to the west of Odisha, and encompasses the Sunabeda Sanctuary (591.75 km2) and the Patdhara forest block to its south (364.42 km2).[3][4]

Sunabeda campaigns[edit]
 Awareness Program by The Corridor Foundation
The Corridor Foundation, a volunteering organisation has been working since 2017 on creating awareness for wildlife conservation. Local volunteers from villages like Cherchuan, Jamgaon, Sunabeda, Kholibhitar have joined hands to protect the forests. Apart from awareness programs, multiple events have been organised involving school children. Also the organisation has been continuously influencing National Tiger Conservation Authority and Odisha State Forest Department to declare the wildlife sanctuary as Tiger Reserve, a much awaited step in conserving this last habitat of Tigers in Western Odisha. Also programs like Sapling distribution, plantation and biodiversity documentation has been carried out by the organisation.[5]
Wild Orissa’s Sunabeda Tiger Conservation Programme is going on since 1997. As part of this programme special emphasis has been laid upon tiger conservation in the forests of Sunabeda-Khariar in the Nuapara district of Orissa constitute a vital tiger habitat. The last census in 2002 put the tiger population in the 600 km2. Sunabeda Sanctuary itself at about 24 individuals. In addition, the neighbouring Khariar forests, measuring about 450 km2., also support a few tigers. Together, these forests harbour a reasonably large tiger gene pool, with long term conservation potential. A compact patch of about 1,000 km2. could be earmarked for the Sunabeda Tiger Reserve.
Also of interest is the movement of the extremely rare wild buffalo, (Bubalus arnee) in the area. These wild bovines enter Orissa from the Udanti and Sitanadi forests in Chhattisgarh. Given that this species is on the verge of extinction in central India, protecting Sunabeda is of vital national importance.
The forests of the Sunabeda Sanctuary are sparsely populated. The region has thus far escaped the attentions of Orissa’s timber mafia. Three rivers and 11 major streams provide plentiful water sources. Sunabeda assumes even more importance when one considers that it is contiguous with the Udanti and Sitanadi forests in Chhattisgarh state to the west. If Sunabeda and Khariar are also given Project Tiger status, a large and extremely viable tiger habitat would be safeguarded.[6][7]

Threats and conservation issues[edit]
 Crumbled forest beat houses
Human pressure
Livestock grazing
Encroachment of forestland
Forest fire
Unsustainable exploitation of the forest resources
Illegal felling
Defunct Forest infrastructure on non existent monitoring/patrolling by Forest Department
Presence of Naxals
According to Kotwal (1997), the highly endangered wild buffalo used to occur here nearly 70 years ago. At present, they are found in Udanti Wildlife Sanctuary in Chhattisgarh, about 20 km away but there is a Patdhara Reserve Forest corridor. Efforts should be made to improve the habitat so that the wild buffalo can come back to Sunabeda using this corridor. This would give a boost to the protection of this sanctuary, which is important for birds also.
About 64 villages, with a human population of 20,000, fragment this sanctuary and there is a large population of cattle. The villagers subsist on forest products to a great extent, as they have land holdings with poor yield. Grazing and encroachment of forest land for cultivation of Cannabis sativa are major threats to the sanctuary. Graziers from other states including Rajasthan arrive here with their camels and goats, which compete with local herbivores for the grass. Though there is a proposal for a tiger reserve, there are extensive encroachments inside the sanctuary. It is doubtful if these people could be shifted.
The core area of Sunabeda could be increased southwards across the Indra nullah (stream), to add 30,000 ha of forest without human habitation (Kotwal 1997).
Following are the recommendations by NGO, The Corridor Foundation made to NTCA and State Government based on detailed study in the area between 2018-20.

Immediately Notify Sunabeda as a Tiger Reserve, which has been pending since long after in- principle approval has been communicated by the NTCA.
Take up the matter with Home Department to sanitise the area from Naxalites.
Create an enabling environment for forest staff to return to their positions for any meaningful work.
Ground massive awareness campaign in enclosed and fringe villages and towns of Khariar and Nuapada with people as stakeholders.
Forest and wildlife staff needs to be provided with required amenities including free ration, prophylactic/ preventive medicines, support auxiliary staff and a vehicle in each Range.
Monitoring wild animals should start earnestly after staff positioning so that it becomes ingrained in routine work.
Implement the management plan in a participatory mode with the EDC/ VSS.
Work out, initiate and implement a model voluntary relocation plan in a way that, it shall have a spread effect.
Issue a direction to prevent migratory livestock entering the area.
Wildlife wing in collaboration with District Collector to facilitate income generating activities for villagers to create conducive wildlife- people interface.
Gallery[edit]



































































References[edit]


^ "Sunabeda". Protected Planet. Retrieved 2020-07-17.

^ "Sunabeda PA :: Odisha Wildlife Organisation". Welcome. 2017-07-28. Retrieved 2020-07-17.

^ "Project Tiger : Wild Life Conservation in Odisha". Welcome to Wild Life Conservation in Odisha. 2003-12-03. Retrieved 2020-07-17.

^ "Milestone Initiatives". Project Tiger. Project Tiger. Retrieved 17 July 2020.

^ "Sunabeda - Once a Bastion for Wildlife". 13 April 2021.

^ "Wild Orissa".

^ "Sunabeda-Khariar tigers need protection". www.sanctuaryasia.com. Archived from the original on 2014-11-20. 


External links[edit]
Official website
vteProtected areas of OdishaBiosphere reserves
Simlipal Biosphere Reserve
National parks
Bhitarkanika
Similipal
Wildlife sanctuaries
Baisipalli
Balimela
Balukhand-Konark
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Chandaka
Debrigarh
Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary
Hadgarh
Kapilasa
Karlapat
Kondakameru
Kotgarh
Kuldiha
Lakhari Valley
Nandankanan
Saptasajya
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Ushakothi
Bird sanctuaries
Chilika Lake
Nalbana Bird Sanctuary
Zoos
Nandankanan Zoological Park
Protected areas of India
vteTiger reserves of India
National Tiger Conservation Authority
Project Tiger
Assam
Kaziranga Tiger Reserve
Manas Tiger Reserve
Nameri Tiger Reserve
Orang Tiger Reserve
Arunachal Pradesh
Kamlang Wildlife Sanctuary
Namdapha Tiger Reserve
Pakhui Tiger Reserve
Andhra Pradesh
Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Bihar
Valmiki Tiger Reserve
Chhattisgarh
Achanakmar Tiger Reserve
Indravati Tiger Reserves
Udanti & Sitanadi Tiger Reserve
Jharkhand
Palamau Tiger Reserve
Karnataka
Bandipur Tiger Reserve
Kali Tiger Reserve
Nagarhole Tiger Reserve
Bhadra Tiger Reserve
Anshi Dandeli Tiger Reserve
Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary
Kerala
Periyar Tiger Reserve
Parambikulam Tiger Reserve
Madhya Pradesh
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve
Bori-Satpura Tiger Reserve
Kanha Tiger Reserve
Panna Tiger Reserve
Pench Tiger Reserve
Sanjay-Dubri Tiger Reserve
Maharashtra
Melghat Tiger Reserve
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve
Shahayadri Tiger reserve
Nagzira-Navegaon Tiger Reserve
Bor Tiger Reserve
Mizoram
Dampa Tiger Reserve
Odisha
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Simlipal Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Rajasthan
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve
Sariska Tiger Reserve
Mukandra Hills Tiger Reserve
Tamil Nadu
Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve
Anamalai Tiger Reserve
Mudumalai Tiger Reserve
Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve
Telangana
Kawal Tiger Reserve
Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Amrabad Tiger Reserve
Uttar Pradesh
Dudhwa Tiger Reserve
Pilibhit Tiger Reserve
Uttarakhand
Corbett Tiger Reserve
Rajaji Tiger reserve
West Bengal
Buxa Tiger Reserve
Sunderbans Tiger Reserve

Category





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sunabeda_Wildlife_Sanctuary&oldid=1077924252"
Categories: IUCN Category IVNorthern dry deciduous forestsTiger reserves of IndiaWildlife sanctuaries in OdishaProposed protected areasHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking in-text citations from July 2020All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCoordinates on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 18 March 2022, at 23:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





