



Jetty - Wikipedia




































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1For regulating rivers


				Toggle For regulating rivers subsection
			




1.1Wing dams







1.2At the outlet of tideless rivers







1.3At the mouth of tidal rivers









2For berthing at docks







3At entrances to jetty harbors







4At lagoon outlets







5See also







6Notes







7References













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Jetty




20 languages



CatalàDanskDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisहिन्दीItalianoBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPolskiPortuguêsSvenska粵語中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Low bank or small wharf stretching from the shore into a water span
For other uses, see Jetty (disambiguation).
"Malecón" redirects here. For the other use of the word, see Esplanade. For the jetty in Havana, see Malecón, Havana. For the jetty in Puerto Vallarta, see Malecón, Puerto Vallarta.



Look up  jetty in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Coastal lagoons fronted by barrier spits typically have entrances that migrate over time. Here, the entrance has been fixed by jetty construction. Carlsbad, California, April 1998.
 Aerial view of a jetty at Swakopmund, Namibia (2017)
A jetty is a structure that projects from land out into water. A jetty may serve as a breakwater, as a walkway, or both; or, in pairs, as a means of constricting a channel. The term derives from the French word jetée, "thrown", signifying something thrown out.[1]


For regulating rivers[edit]
Wing dams[edit]
One form of jetties, wing dams, are extended out, opposite one another, from each bank of a river, at intervals, to contract a wide channel, and by concentration of the current to produce a deepening.[2]

At the outlet of tideless rivers[edit]
 North Jetty on the left and South Jetty on the right at the mouth of Sebastian Inlet in Florida from the Indian River to the Atlantic Ocean.
Jetties have been constructed on each side of the outlet river of some of the rivers flowing into the Baltic, with the objective of prolonging the scour of the river and protecting the channel from being shoaled by the littoral drift along the shore. Another application of parallel jetties is in lowering the bar in front of one of the mouths of a deltaic river flowing into a tide — a virtual prolongation of its less sea, by extending the scour of the river out to the bar by banks. Jetties prolonging the Sulina branch of the Danube into the Black Sea, and the south pass of the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico, formed of rubble stone and concrete blocks, and respectively, have enabled the discharge of these rivers to scour away the bars obstructing the access to them; and they have also carried the sediment-bearing waters sufficiently far out to come under the influence of littoral currents, which, by conveying away some of the sediment, postpone the eventual formation of a fresh bar farther out (see river engineering).[2]

At the mouth of tidal rivers[edit]
Where a river is narrow near its mouth, has a generally feeble discharge and a small tidal range, the sea is liable on an exposed coast to block up its outlet during severe storms. The river is thus forced to seek another exit at a weak spot of the beach, which along a low coast may be at some distance off; and this new outlet in its turn may be blocked up, so that the river from time to time shifts the position of its mouth. This inconvenient cycle of changes may be stopped by fixing the outlet of the river at a suitable site, by carrying a jetty on each side of this outlet across the beach, thereby concentrating its discharge in a definite channel and protecting the mouth from being blocked up by littoral drift. This system was long ago applied to the shifting outlet of the river Yare to the south of Yarmouth, and has also been successfully employed for fixing the wandering mouth of the Adur near Shoreham, and of the Adour flowing into the Bay of Biscay below Bayonne. When a new channel was cut across the Hook of Holland to provide a straighter and deeper outlet channel for the river Meuse, forming the approach channel to Rotterdam, low, broad, parallel jetties, composed of fascine mattresses weighted with stone, were carried across the foreshore into the sea on either side of the new mouth of the river, to protect the jetty channel from littoral drift, and cause the discharge of the river to maintain it out to deep water. The channel, also, beyond the outlet of the river Nervion into the Bay of Biscay has been regulated by jetties; and by extending the south-west jetty out for nearly 0.5 miles (0.80 km) with a curve concave towards the channel the outlet has not only been protected to some extent from the easterly drift, but the bar in front has been lowered by the scour produced by the discharge of the river following the concave bend of the southwest jetty. As the outer portion of this jetty was exposed to westerly storms from the Bay of Biscay before the outer harbour was constructed, it has been given the form and strength of a breakwater situated in shallow water.[2]

For berthing at docks[edit]
Where docks are given sloping sides, openwork timber jetties are generally carried across the slope, at the ends of which vessels can lie in deep water or more solid structures are erected over the slope for supporting coal-tips. Pilework jetties are also constructed in the water outside the entrances to docks on each side, so as to form an enlarging trumpet-shaped channel between the entrance, lock or tidal basin and the approach channel, in order to guide vessels in entering or leaving the docks. Solid jetties, moreover, lined with quay walls, are sometimes carried out into a wide dock, at right angles to the line of quays at the side, to enlarge the accommodation; and they also serve, when extended on a large scale from the coast of a tideless sea under shelter of an outlying breakwater, to form the basins in which vessels lie when discharging and taking in cargoes in such a port as Marseille.[2]

At entrances to jetty harbors[edit]
 Aerial view of jetties, constructed of dolosse, at Humboldt Bay harbor entrance. These jetties mitigate unpredictable shifting sands.
The approach channel to some ports situated on sandy coasts is guided and protected across the beach by parallel jetties. In some cases, these are made solid up to a little above low water of neap tides, on which open timber-work is erected, provided with a planked platform at the top raised above the highest tides. In other cases, they consist entirely of solid material without timber-work. The channel between the jetties was originally maintained by tidal scour from low-lying areas close to the coast, and subsequently by the current from sluicing basins; but it is now often considerably deepened by sand-pump dredging. It is protected to some extent by the solid portion of the jetties from the inroad of sand from the adjacent beach, and from the levelling action of the waves; while the upper open portion serves to indicate the channel and to guide the vessels, if necessary (see harbor). The bottom part of the older jetties, in such long-established jetty ports as Calais, Dunkirk and Ostend, was composed of clay or rubble stone, covered on the top by fascine-work or pitching, but the deepening of the jetty channel by dredging and the need that arose for its enlargement led to the reconstruction of the jetties at these ports. The nes jetties at Dunkirk were founded in the sandy beach, by the aid of compressed air, at a depth of 22.75 feet (6.93 m). below low water of spring tides; and their solid masonry portion, on a concrete foundation was raised 50 feet (15 m). above low water of neap tides.[2]

At lagoon outlets[edit]
 Private jetties near the mouth of the Nambucca River, New South Wales, Australia
A small tidal rise spreading tidal water over a large expanse of lagoon or inland backwater causes the influx and efflux of the tide to maintain a deep channel through a narrows no longer confined by a bank on each side, becomes dispersed, and owing to the reduction of its scouring force, is no longer able at a moderate distance from the shore effectually to resist the action of tending to form a continuous beach in front of the outlet. Hence a bar is produced that diminishes the available depth in the approach channel. By carrying out a solid jetty over the bar, however on each side of the outlet, the tidal currents are concentrated in the channel across the bar, and lower it by scour. Thus the available depth of the approach channels to Venice through the Malamocco and Lido outlets from the Venetian Lagoon have been deepened several feet (metres) over their bars by jetties of rubble, carried out across the foreshore into deep water on both sides of the channel. Other examples are provided by the long jetties extended into the sea in front of the entrance to Charleston harbour, formerly constructed of fascines weighed down with stone and logs, but subsequently of rubble stone, and by the two converging rubble jetties carried out from each shore of Dublin Bay for deepening the approach to Dublin harbour.[2] Jetties have the adverse effect of endangering Surf Culture as a whole with their ability to destroy surf breaks.[3]

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to jetties.

Breakwater
Dock (maritime)
Groyne
Jettied floors in medieval houses
Mole
Pier
Port
Spiral Jetty
Wharf
Notes[edit]


^ 
"the definition of jetty". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 4 April 2018.

^ a b c d e f  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Vernon-Harcourt, Leveson Francis (1911). "Jetty".  In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 359–360.

^ "5 Insane Waves That Are Now Extinct". Magicseaweed.com. Retrieved 2019-05-29.


References[edit]
Humboldt Bay Recreation & Conservation District: Humboldt Bay Harbor Setting
Authority control: National 
Germany





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jetty&oldid=1153139588"
Categories: Coastal constructionWater transportHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles containing French-language textCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with GND identifiers






 This page was last edited on 4 May 2023, at 12:49 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





