



Port - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Historical ports







2Modern ports







3Types


				Toggle Types subsection
			




3.1Seaport





3.1.1Cargo port







3.1.2Cruise home port







3.1.3Smart port







3.1.4Port of call









3.2Fishing port







3.3Inland port







3.4Warm-water port







3.5Dry port









4Environmental issues


				Toggle Environmental issues subsection
			




4.1Dredging







4.2Invasive species







4.3Air pollution







4.4Water quality





4.4.1Spills, pollution and contamination









4.5Climate change and sea level rise







4.6Reducing impact









5World's major ports


				Toggle World's major ports subsection
			




5.1Africa







5.2Asia







5.3Europe







5.4North America







5.5Oceania







5.6South America









6See also


				Toggle See also subsection
			




6.1Other logistics hubs







6.2Lists









7References







8External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Port




114 languages



AfrikaansАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa BaliবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБеларускаяभोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàCebuanoČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаKiswahiliKurdîລາວLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLingálaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyमराठीმარგალურიمصرىBahasa MelayuMinangkabauМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRomani čhibRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийसंस्कृतम्ScotsShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiSoomaaligaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча / tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWalon文言Winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Maritime facility where ships may dock to load and discharge passengers and cargo
This article is about the facility for ships. For other uses, see Port (disambiguation).
 The Port of New York and New Jersey grew from the original harbor at the convergence of the Hudson River and the East River at the Upper New York Bay.
 The Porticciolo del Cedas port in Barcola near Trieste, a small local port
 Port of Durban in Durban, South Africa is Africa's busiest port
 Seaport, a 17th-century depiction by Claude Lorrain, 1638
 Shanghai Port is the world's busiest container port
 Port of Kaohsiung is the largest port in Taiwan.
 Port of Hamburg
 The port of Piraeus
 Port of Seattle
 Port of Haifa, Israel
 Port of Barcelona, one of Spain's largest ports
 Port of Montreal, Quebec.
 The Port of Duluth-Superior, the largest freshwater port in the world
 Cargo port in Hilo, Hawaii
 Port of Isla Cristina, in southwestern Spain.
 Port of Palma, Balearic Islands
A port is a maritime facility comprising one or more wharves or loading areas, where ships load and discharge cargo and passengers. Although usually situated on a sea coast or estuary, ports can also be found far inland, such as Hamburg, Manchester and Duluth; these access the sea via rivers or canals. Because of their roles as ports of entry for immigrants as well as soldiers in wartime, many port cities have experienced dramatic multi-ethnic and multicultural changes throughout their histories.[1]
Ports are extremely important to the global economy; 70% of global merchandise trade by value passes through a port.[2] For this reason, ports are also often densely populated settlements that provide the labor for processing and handling goods and related services for the ports.  Today by far the greatest growth in port development is in Asia, the continent with some of the world's largest and busiest ports, such as Singapore and the Chinese ports of Shanghai and Ningbo-Zhoushan. As of 2020, the busiest passenger port in Europe is the Port of Helsinki in Finland.[3] Nevertheless, countless smaller ports do exist that may only serve their local tourism or fishing industries.
Ports can have a wide environmental impact on local ecologies and waterways, most importantly water quality, which can be caused by dredging, spills and other pollution. Ports are heavily affected by changing environmental factors caused by climate change as most port infrastructure is extremely vulnerable to sea level rise and coastal flooding.[2] Internationally, global ports are beginning to identify ways to improve coastal management practices and integrate climate change adaptation practices into their construction.[2]


Historical ports[edit]
Main article: Historical ports
Wherever ancient civilisations engaged in maritime trade, they tended to develop sea ports. One of the world's oldest known artificial harbors is at Wadi al-Jarf on the Red Sea.[4] Along with the finding of harbor structures, ancient anchors have also been found.
Other ancient ports include Guangzhou during Qin Dynasty China and Canopus, the principal Egyptian port for Greek trade before the foundation of Alexandria. In ancient Greece, Athens' port of Piraeus was the base for the Athenian fleet which played a crucial role in the Battle of Salamis against the Persians in 480 BCE. In ancient India from 3700 BCE, Lothal was a prominent city of the Indus valley civilisation, located in the Bhal region of the modern state of Gujarāt.[5] Ostia Antica was the port of ancient Rome with Portus established by Claudius and enlarged by Trajan to supplement the nearby port of Ostia. In Japan, during the Edo period, the island of Dejima was the only port open for trade with Europe and received only a single Dutch ship per year, whereas Osaka was the largest domestic port and the main trade hub for rice.
Post-classical Swahili kingdoms are known to have had trade port islands and trade routes[6] with the Islamic world and Asia. They were described by Greek historians as "metropolises".[7] Famous African trade ports such as Mombasa, Zanzibar, Mogadishu and Kilwa[8] were known to Chinese sailors such as Zheng He and medieval Islamic historians such as the Berber Islamic voyager Abu Abdullah ibn Battuta.[9]
Many of these ancient sites no longer exist or function as modern ports. Even in more recent times, ports sometimes fall out of use. Rye, East Sussex, was an important English port in the Middle Ages, but the coastline changed and it is now 2 miles (3.2 km) from the sea, while the ports of Ravenspurn and Dunwich have been lost to coastal erosion.

Modern ports[edit]
Whereas early ports tended to be just simple harbours, modern ports tend to be multimodal distribution hubs, with transport links using sea, river, canal, road, rail and air routes. Successful ports are located to optimize access to an active hinterland, such as the London Gateway. Ideally, a port will grant easy navigation to ships, and will give shelter from wind and waves. Ports are often on estuaries, where the water may be shallow and may need regular dredging. Deep water ports such as Milford Haven  are less common, but can handle larger ships with a greater draft, such as super tankers, Post-Panamax vessels and large container ships. Other businesses such as regional distribution centres, warehouses and freight-forwarders, canneries and other processing facilities find it advantageous to be located within a port or nearby. Modern ports will have specialised cargo-handling equipment, such as gantry cranes, reach stackers and forklift trucks.
Ports usually have specialised functions: some tend to cater mainly for passenger ferries and cruise ships; some specialise in container traffic or general cargo; and some ports play an important military role for their nation's navy. Some third world countries and small islands such as Ascension and St Helena still have limited port facilities, so that ships must anchor off while their cargo and passengers are taken ashore by barge or launch (respectively).
In modern times, ports survive  or decline, depending on current economic trends.  In the UK, both the ports of Liverpool and Southampton were once significant in the transatlantic passenger liner business. Once airliner traffic decimated that trade, both ports diversified to container cargo and cruise ships. Up until the 1950s the Port of London was a major international port on the River Thames, but changes in shipping and the use of containers and larger ships have led to its decline. Thamesport,[10] a small semi-automated container port (with links to the Port of Felixstowe, the UK's largest container port) thrived for some years, but has been hit hard by competition from the emergent London Gateway port and logistics hub.
In mainland Europe, it is normal for ports to be publicly owned, so that, for instance, the ports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam are owned partly by the state and partly by the cities themselves.[11]
Even though modern ships tend to have bow-thrusters and stern-thrusters,[citation needed] many port authorities still require vessels to use pilots and tugboats for manoeuvering large ships in tight quarters. For instance, ships approaching the Belgian port of Antwerp, an inland port on the River Scheldt, are obliged to use Dutch pilots when navigating on that part of the estuary that belongs to the Netherlands.
Ports with international traffic have customs facilities.

Types[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The terms "port" and "seaport" are used for different types of facilities handling ocean-going vessels, and river port is used for river traffic, such as barges and other shallow-draft vessels.

Seaport[edit]
A seaport is a port located on the shore of a sea or ocean. It is further categorized as a "cruise port" or a "cargo port".[citation needed] Additionally, "cruise ports" are also known as a "home port" or a "port of call". The "cargo port" is also further categorized into a "bulk" or "break bulk port" or as a "container port".

Cargo port[edit]
Cargo ports are quite different from cruise ports, because each handles very different cargo, which has to be loaded and unloaded by a variety of mechanical means. 
Bulk cargo ports may handle one particular type of cargo or numerous cargoes, such as grains, liquid fuels, liquid chemicals, wood, automobiles, etc. Such ports are known as the "bulk" or "break bulk ports". 
Ports that handle containerized cargo are known as container ports. 
Most cargo ports handle all sorts of cargo, but some ports are very specific as to what cargo they handle. Additionally, individual cargo ports may be divided into different operating terminals which handle the different types of cargoes, and may be operated by different companies, also known as terminal operators, or stevedores.[12]

Cruise home port[edit]
A cruise home port is the port where cruise ship passengers board (or embark) to start their cruise and disembark the cruise ship at the end of their cruise. It is also where the cruise ship's supplies are loaded for the cruise, which includes everything from fresh water and fuel to fruits, vegetables, champagne, and any other supplies needed for the cruise. "Cruise home ports" are very busy places during the day the cruise ship is in port, because off-going passengers debark their baggage and on-coming passengers board the ship in addition to all the supplies being loaded. Cruise home ports tend to have large passenger terminals to handle the large number of passengers passing through the port. The busiest cruise home port in the world is the Port of Miami, Florida.

Smart port[edit]
Main article: Smart port
A smart port uses technologies, including the Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) to be more efficient at handling goods.[13] Smart ports usually deploy cloud-based software as part of the process of greater automation to help generate the operating flow that helps the port work smoothly.[14] At present, most of the world's ports have somewhat embedded technology, if not for full leadership. However, thanks to global government initiatives and exponential growth in maritime trade, the amount of intelligent ports has gradually increased. This latest report by business intelligence provider Visiongain assesses that Smart Ports Market spending will reach $1.5 bn in 2019.[15]

Port of call[edit]
A port of call is an intermediate stop for a ship on its sailing itinerary. At these ports, cargo ships may take on supplies or fuel, as well as unloading and loading cargo while cruise liners have passengers get on or off ship.

Fishing port[edit]
A fishing port is a port or harbor for landing and distributing fish. It may be a recreational facility, but it is usually commercial. A fishing port is the only port that depends on an ocean product, and depletion of fish may cause a fishing port to be uneconomical.

Inland port[edit]
Main article: Inland port
An inland port is a port on a navigable lake, river (fluvial port), or canal with access to a sea or ocean, which therefore allows a ship to sail from the ocean inland to the port to load or unload its cargo. An example of this is the St. Lawrence Seaway which allows ships to travel from the Atlantic Ocean several thousand kilometers inland to Great Lakes ports like Toronto, Duluth-Superior, and Chicago.[16]  The term "inland port" is also used for dry ports.

Warm-water port[edit]
A warm-water port (also known as an ice-free port) is one where the water does not freeze in winter. This is mainly used in the context of countries with mostly cold winters where parts of the coastline freezes over every winter. Because they are available year-round, warm-water ports can be of great geopolitical or economic interest. Such settlements as Dalian in China, Murmansk, Novorossiysk, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and Vostochny Port[17] in Russia, Odesa in Ukraine, Kushiro in Japan and Valdez at the terminus of the Alaska Pipeline owe their very existence to being ice-free ports. The Baltic Sea and similar areas have ports available year-round beginning in the 20th century thanks to icebreakers, but earlier access problems prompted Russia to expand its territory to the Black Sea.

Dry port[edit]
Main article: Dry port
A dry port is an inland intermodal terminal directly connected by road or rail to a seaport and operating as a centre for the transshipment of sea cargo to inland destinations.[18]

Environmental issues[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (December 2020)Further information: Environmental impact of shipping
Ports and their operation are often both the cause of environmental issues, such as sediment contamination and spills from ships and are susceptible to larger environmental issues, such as human caused climate change and its effects.[19]

Dredging[edit]
Main article: Dredging
Every year 100 million cubic metres of marine sediment are dredged to improve waterways around ports. Dredging, in its practice, disturbs local ecosystems, brings sediments into the water column, and can stir up pollutants captured in the sediments.[19]

Invasive species[edit]
Invasive species are often spread by the bilge water and species attached to the hulls of ships.[19] It is estimated that there are over 7000 invasive species transported in bilge water around the world on a daily basis[20] Invasive species can have direct or in-direct interactions with native sea life. Direct interaction such as predation, is when a native species with no natural predator is all of a sudden prey of an invasive specie. In-direct interaction can be diseases or other health conditions brought by invasive species. [21]

 A ship pumping bilge water into a harbor
Air pollution[edit]
Ports are also a source of increased air pollution both because of the ships and land transportation at the port. Transportation corridors around ports have higher exhaust and emissions and this can have related health effects on the local communities.[19]

Water quality[edit]
Water quality around ports is often lower because of both direct and indirect pollution from the shipping, and other challenges caused by the port's community, such as trash washing into the ocean.[19]

Spills, pollution and contamination[edit]
Sewage from ships, and leaks of oil and chemicals from shipping vessels can contaminate local water, and cause other effects like nutrient pollution in the water.[19]

Climate change and sea level rise[edit]
Ports and their infrastructure are very vulnerable to climate change and sea level rise, because many of them are in low-lying areas designed for status quo water levels.[2] Variable weather, coastal erosion, and sea level rise all put pressure on existing infrastructure, resulting in subsidence, coastal flooding and other direct pressures on the port.[2]

Reducing impact[edit]
There are several initiatives to decrease negative environmental impacts of ports.[22][23][24] The World Port Sustainability Program points to all of the Sustainable Development Goals as potential ways of addressing port sustainability.[25] These include SIMPYC, the World Ports Climate Initiative, the African Green Port Initiative, EcoPorts and Green Marine.[24][26]

World's major ports[edit]
Main article: List of ports
Africa[edit]
The port of Tangier Med is the largest port on the Mediterranean and in Africa by capacity and went into service in July 2007.
The busiest port in Africa is Port Said in Egypt.
Asia[edit]
See also: List of East Asian ports and List of ports and harbours of the Indian Ocean
 The port of Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh, India
The port of Shanghai is the largest port in the world in both cargo tonnage and activity. It regained its position as the world's busiest port by cargo tonnage and the world's busiest container port in 2009 and 2010, respectively. It is followed by the ports of Singapore, Hong Kong and Kaohsiung, Taiwan, all of which are in East and Southeast Asia.
The port of Singapore is the world's second-busiest port in terms of total shipping tonnage, it also transships a third of the world's shipping containers, half of the world's annual supply of crude oil, and is the world's busiest transshipment port.

Europe[edit]
See also: List of busiest ports in Europe
 Port of Hamina-Kotka, a port of the two neighboring cities: Hamina and Kotka.
Europe's busiest container port and biggest port by cargo tonnage by far is the Port of Rotterdam, in the Netherlands. It is followed by the Belgian Port of Antwerp or the German Port of Hamburg, depending on which metric is used.[27] In turn, the Spanish Port of Valencia is the busiest port in the Mediterranean basin, while the Portuguese Port of Sines is the busiest atlantic port.

North America[edit]
See also: List of North American ports and Ports of the United States
The largest ports include the South Louisiana, Houston, Port of New York/New Jersey, Los Angeles in the U.S., Manzanillo in Mexico and Vancouver in Canada.[citation needed] Panama also has the Panama Canal that connects the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean, and is a key conduit for international trade.

Oceania[edit]
The largest port in Australia is the Port of Melbourne.

South America[edit]
According to ECLAC's "Maritime and Logistics Profile of Latin America and the Caribbean", the largest ports in South America are the Port of Santos in Brazil, Cartagena in Colombia, Callao in Peru, Guayaquil in Ecuador, and the Port of Buenos Aires in Argentina.[28]

See also[edit]
Anchorage (shipping)
Megaproject
Marina - port for recreational boating
Port management
Port operator
Ship transport
Other logistics hubs[edit]
Airport
Spaceport
Port of entry
Lists[edit]
Lists of ports
List of busiest cruise ports by passengers
References[edit]


^ Caves, R. W. (2004). Encyclopedia of the City. Routledge. pp. 528. ISBN 9780415252256.

^ a b c d e Asariotis, Regina; Benamara, Hassiba; Mohos-Naray, Viktoria (December 2017). Port Industry Survey on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation (PDF) (Report). UN Conference on Trade and Development. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-11-25.

^ "Maritime ports freight and passenger statistics" (PDF). Eurostat. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-07-22. Retrieved 18 June 2020.

^ Rossella Lorenzi (12 April 2013). "Most Ancient Port, Hieroglyphic Papyri Found". Discovery News. Retrieved 21 April 2013.

^ Rao, S. R. Rao (1985). Lothal. Archeological Survey of India.

^ "Eastern and Southern Africa 500–1000 AD". Metmuseum.org. Retrieved 21 April 2009.

^ "Tanzanian dig unearths ancient secret by Tira Shubart". BBC News. 17 April 2002. Retrieved 21 April 2009.

^ Newitt, M.D.D. (1995). A History of Mozambique. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253340061.

^ "Ibn Battuta: Travels in Asia and Africa 1325–1354". Fordham.edu. 21 February 2001. Retrieved 21 April 2009.

^ "Welcome". London Thamesport. Retrieved 6 September 2018.

^ "Organisation". Port of Rotterdam. 2015-06-15. Retrieved 2020-10-07.

^ Khan, Khalil U. (15 September 2014). "Stevedoring & The Role of Stevedores in Shipping". International Institute of Marine Surveying. Retrieved 7 April 2021.

^ "Smart Ports of the Future: A Digital Tomorrow". Port Technology International. 2019-09-17. Retrieved 2019-10-11.

^ "Ports in the Cloud: The Next Step in Automation?". Port Technology International. 2018-11-09. Retrieved 2019-10-11.

^ "'Smart Ports Market spending will reach $1.5bn in 2019', says Visiongain". Visiongain (Press release). 2019-09-05. Retrieved 2019-09-09.

^ "Seaway System". greatlakes-seaway.com.

^ "Vostochny Port JSC, Geography, Location". Vostochny Port website. 2007. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2012. Vostochny Port is located in the south of Primorsky Region, in the southeast of Nakhodka bay, in Vrangel bay. This is unique natural harbor is no ice restrictions even in severe winters.

^ "Feasibility Study on the network operation of Hinterland Hubs (Dry Port Concept) to improve and modernise ports' connections to the hinterland and to improve networking" (PDF). InLoc. January 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-04-13. Retrieved 2008-03-10.

^ a b c d e f OECD (2011-02-17).  Braathen, Nils Axel (ed.). Environmental Impacts of International Shipping: The Role of Ports. OECD. doi:10.1787/9789264097339-en. ISBN 978-92-64-09682-0.

^ "What are California Marine Invasive Species?". wildlife.ca.gov. Retrieved 2021-05-13.

^ Fisheries, NOAA (2021-05-07). "Invasive and Exotic Marine Species | NOAA Fisheries". NOAA. Retrieved 2021-05-13.

^ Hossain, Tahazzud; Adams, Michelle; Walker, Tony R. (2020). "Role of sustainability in global seaports". Ocean & Coastal Management. 202: 105435. doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2020.105435.

^ Hossain, Tahazzud; Adams, Michelle; Walker, Tony R. (2019). "Sustainability initiatives in Canadian ports". Marine Policy. 106: 103519. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103519. S2CID 164819617.

^ a b Walker, Tony R. (2016). "Green Marine: An environmental program to establish sustainability in marine transportation". Marine Pollution Bulletin. 105 (1): 199–207. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.02.029. PMID 26899158.

^ "Areas of Interest – World Port Sustainability Program". sustainableworldports.org. Retrieved 2020-12-19.

^ EOS magazine, 6, 2012

^ "World Port Rankings 2011" (PDF). Agência Nacional de Transportes Aquaviários. Antaq, Brazil. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-12-02. Retrieved 6 September 2018.

^ "Los 10 mayores puertos de América Latina y Caribe en tráfico de contenedores". Revista de Ingeniería Naval (in Spanish). Madrid, Spain: Asociación de Ingenieros Navales y Oceánicos de España. September 28, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2017.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ports and harbours.

Port Industry Statistics, American Association of Port Authorities
Information on yachting facilities at ports around the world from Noonsite.com
Social & Economic Benefits of PORTS from "NOAA Socioeconomics" website initiative
Antunes, Cátia: Early Modern Ports, 1500-1750, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: November 2, 2011.
vtePorts and harborsTypes
Home port
Fuelling station
Inland harbor
Inland port
Landing
Outport
Port of entry
Trust port
Dry port
Anchorage
Wharf
Naval base
Rankings
World's busiest port
Busiest container ports
Busiest by tonnage
Busiest by cruise passengers
Countries by container port traffic
Locations
Arctic
Atlantic
Indian
Pacific
Southern
Port management
Maritime transport
Port authority
Port state control
Harbour engineer
Port operator
Security
Port operations simulator
Terminal Operating System
Conventions
SOLAS
MARPOL 73/78
STCW
Ballast Water Management Convention

 Transport portal
 Category
 Commons
 Wiktionary "Port"
 Wiktionary "Harbor"
 WikiProject

vtePublic infrastructureAssetsandfacilities
Airports
Bridges
Broadband
Canals
Critical infrastructure
Dams
Electricity generation
Energy development
Hazardous waste
Hospitals
Levees
Lighthouses
Municipal solid waste
Parks
Ports
Public housing
Public spaces
Public transport
Public utilities
Public works
Rail transport
Roads
Sewage
State schools
Telecommunications
Wastewater treatment
Water supply network
Wind power
Concepts
Appropriation
Infrastructure asset management
Build–operate–transfer
Design–build
Earmark
Engineering contracts
Externality
Fixed cost
Government debt
Infrastructure bond
Life-cycle assessment
Lindahl tax
Maintenance, repair, and operations
Natural monopoly
Property tax
Public capital
Public finance
Public good
Public sector
Public–private partnership
Renovation
Spillover
Supply chain
Taxation
Upgrade
Issuesandideas
Air traffic control
Brownfield land
Bus rapid transit
Carbon footprint
Congestion pricing
Containerization
Ethanol fuel
Fuel efficiency
Fuel tax
Groundwater
High-speed rail
Hybrid vehicles
Land-use planning
Mobile data terminal
Pork barrel
Recycling
Renewable resources
Reverse osmosis
Smart grid
Smart growth
Stormwater
Sustainable urban infrastructure
Traffic congestion
Transit-oriented development
Urban sprawl
Waste-to-energy
Weatherization
Wireless
Fieldsof study
Architecture
Civil engineering
Electrical engineering
Mechanical engineering
Public economics
Public policy
Urban planning
Examples
Akashi Kaikyō Bridge
Autobahn
Brooklyn Bridge
Bus rapid transit systems
Channel Tunnel
Controlled-access highway systems
Electric power transmission
High-speed trains
Hong Kong International Airport
Hoover Dam
Humber Bridge
Kansai International Airport
Millau Viaduct
Nuclear power
Offshore wind farms
Panama Canal
Port of Shanghai
San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge
Suez Canal
Solar power
Three Gorges Dam
Trans-Alaska pipeline
Transcontinental railroads

vteReal estate developmentsCommercial
Airport
Business park
Commercial area
Mixed-use development
Office building
Port
inland
Power center
Retail park
Riverfront
Shopping center (Shopping mall)
Shopping streets and districts
Industrial
Business cluster
Industrial district
Industrial park
Technology centers
Residential
Agrihood
Boarding house
Bungalow court
City block
Company town
Conservation community
Executive home
Golf course community
Gated community
Housing estate
Intentional community
Luxury apartment
Mixed-use development
Model dwellings for the poor
Multifamily residential
Penthouse apartment
Private community
Public housing
Residential area
Retirement community
Revenue house
Rooming house
Single room occupancy
Subdivision
Tract housing
Science/education
Campus
Research park
Satellite campus
Science park
Municipal
Arcology
Civic center
Garden city movement
Model village
Planned cities
Planned community
Urban green space
parks
Buildings
Apartment
House
types
Skyscraper
Tower block
Villa
Miscellaneous
Brownfield land
Cemetery
Residential cluster development
Construction
Context theory
Eminent domain
Greenfield land
Greyfield land
Groundscraper
Land-use planning
Park
Parking
Playground
Redevelopment
Regional planning
Urban design
Urban planning
Zoning

Authority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Port&oldid=1154428578"
Categories: Ports and harboursNautical terminologyInfrastructureIndustrial buildingsHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2021Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from October 2020Articles to be expanded from December 2020All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles with unsourced statements from February 2021Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiers






 This page was last edited on 12 May 2023, at 12:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





