



Ecotourism - Wikipedia




































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Benefits


				Toggle Benefits subsection
			




1.1Potential Ecological Benefits





1.1.1Direct Benefits







1.1.2Indirect benefits









1.2Potential Economic Benefits





1.2.1Direct Benefits







1.2.2Indirect Benefits









1.3Potential Socio-Cultural Benefits





1.3.1Direct and Indirect Benefits











2Terminology and history


				Toggle Terminology and history subsection
			




2.1Related terms





2.1.1Sustainable tourism











3Improving sustainability


				Toggle Improving sustainability subsection
			




3.1Principles







3.2Regulation and accreditation







3.3Labels and certification







3.4Guidelines and education







3.5Small scale, slow growth and local control







3.6Efforts to preserve ecosystems at risk









4Natural resource management







5Impact on Indigenous people and Indigenous land







6Criticism


				Toggle Criticism subsection
			




6.1Definition







6.2Negative impact







6.3Direct environmental impacts







6.4Environmental hazards







6.5Who benefits?







6.6Eviction of indigenous people







6.7Mismanagement by government







6.8Case studies









7See also







8References







9Further reading







10External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Ecotourism




62 languages



Afrikaansالعربيةঅসমীয়াAzərbaycancaभोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംმარგალურიBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSarduSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்ไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Eco-tourism)
Tourism visiting environments
 Llano del Muerto waterfall in El Salvador
Ecotourism is a form of tourism involving responsible travel (using sustainable transport) to natural areas, conserving the environment, and improving the well-being of the local people.[1] Its purpose may be to educate the traveler, to provide funds for ecological conservation, to directly benefit the economic development and political empowerment of local communities, or to foster respect for different cultures and for human rights. Since the 1980s, ecotourism has been considered a critical endeavor by environmentalists, so that future generations may experience destinations relatively untouched by human intervention.[2]: 33  Ecotourism may focus on educating travelers on local environments and natural surroundings with an eye to ecological conservation. Some include in the definition of ecotourism the effort to produce economic opportunities that make conservation of natural resources financially possible.[3]
Generally, ecotourism deals with interaction with biotic components of the natural environments.[4] Ecotourism focuses on socially responsible travel, personal growth, and environmental sustainability. Ecotourism typically involves travel to destinations where flora, fauna, and cultural heritage are the primary attractions. Ecotourism is intended to offer tourists an insight into the impact of human beings on the environment and to foster a greater appreciation of our natural habitats. Ecotourism aims at minimal environmental impact on the areas visited. Besides fostering respect towards the natural environment, ecotourism also helps in creating socio-economic benefits for the communities of the area visited.
Responsible ecotourism programs include those that minimize the negative aspects of conventional tourism on the environment and enhance the cultural integrity of local people. Therefore, in addition to evaluating environmental and cultural factors, an integral part of ecotourism is the promotion of recycling, energy efficiency, water conservation, and creation of economic opportunities for local communities.[5] For these reasons, ecotourism often appeals to advocates of environmental and social responsibility.
Many consider the term "ecotourism", like "sustainable tourism" (which is a related concept but broader), an oxymoron. Like most long-distance travel, ecotourism often depends on air transportation, which contributes to climate change. Additionally, "the overall effect of sustainable tourism is negative where like ecotourism philanthropic aspirations mask hard-nosed immediate self-interest."[attribution needed][6]


Benefits[edit]
 Seal watching near Malusi Islands in Estonia.
 Kikoti Safari Camp in Tarangire National Park, Tanzania.
Ecotourism is a sub-component of the field of sustainable tourism. Ecotourism must serve to maximize ecological benefits, while contributing to the economic, social and cultural wellbeing of communities living close to ecotourism venues.
Potential ecological, economic and sociocultural benefits associated with ecotourism are described below.[7]

Potential Ecological Benefits[edit]
A primary challenge is to make sure that ecotourism does not compromise the ecological integrity of protected areas and welfare of local communities. Although ecotourism is not supposed to have negative ecological outcomes, these may occur regardless. Ecotourism is widely assumed to have many positive ecological consequences, and some of them are listed as follows:

Direct Benefits[edit]
Incentive to protect natural environments
Incentive to rehabilitate modified environments and lands
Provides funds to manage and expand protected areas
Ecotourists assist with habitat maintenance and enhancement through their own actions
Ecotourists serving as watchdogs or guardians who personally intervene in situations where the environment is perceived to be threatened
Indirect benefits[edit]
Exposure to ecotourism fosters a broader sense of environmentalism
Communities experience changes in environmental attitude and behavior
Areas protected for ecotourism provide environmental benefits
Potential Economic Benefits[edit]
For many decision-makers, economic factors are more compelling than ecological factors in deciding how natural resources should be utilized. Ecotourism economic benefits are presented below:

Direct Benefits[edit]
Generates revenue (related to visitor expenditures) and creates employment that is directly related to the sector
Provides economic opportunities for peripheral regions
Indirect Benefits[edit]
High multiplier effect and indirect revenue employment
Supports cultural and heritage tourism, sectors that are highly compatible with ecotourism.
Potential Socio-Cultural Benefits[edit]
A holistic approach on ecotourism must promote socio-cultural as well as economic and ecological practices. The direct and indirect socio-cultural benefits are outlined as follows:

Direct and Indirect Benefits[edit]
Foster community stability and wellbeing through economic benefits and local participation
Aesthetic and spiritual benefits and enjoyment for locals and tourists
Accessible to a broad spectrum of the population
When assessing potential positive impacts of ecotourism, it is necessary to mention that ecotourism can have unintended negative effects as well. Negative impacts can be mitigated through regulations and codes of conduct that effectively and persuasively impart messages about appropriate visitor behavior.[8]

Terminology and history[edit]
 A hanging bridge in ecotourism area of Thenmala, Kerala in India - India's first planned ecotourism destination
Ecotourism is a late 20th-century neologism compounded eco- and tourism. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, ecotour was first recorded in 1973 and ecotourism, "probably after ecotour", in 1982.[9]

ecotour, n. ... A tour of or visit to an area of ecological interest, usually with an educational element; (in later use also) a similar tour or visit designed to have as little detrimental effect on the ecology as possible or undertaken with the specific aim of helping conservation efforts.
ecotourism, n. ... Tourism to areas of ecological interest (typically exotic and often threatened natural environments), esp. to support conservation efforts and observe wildlife; spec. access to an endangered environment controlled so as to have the least possible adverse effect.
Some sources suggest the terms were used nearly a decade earlier. Claus-Dieter (Nick) Hetzer, an academic and adventurer from Forum International in Berkeley, CA, coined ecotourism in 1965, according to the Contra Costa Times,[10] and ran the first ecotours in the Yucatán during the early 1970s.[11]
The definition of ecotourism adopted by Ecotourism Australia is: "Ecotourism is ecologically sustainable tourism with a primary focus on experiencing natural areas that fosters environmental and cultural understanding, appreciation and conservation."[12]
The Global Ecotourism Network (GEN) defines ecotourism as "responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment, sustains the well-being of the local people, and creates knowledge and understanding through interpretation and education of all involved (visitors, staff and the visited)".
Ecotourism is often misinterpreted as any form of tourism that involves nature (see jungle tourism). Self-proclaimed practitioners and hosts of ecotourism experiences assume it is achieved by simply creating destinations in natural areas. According to critics of this commonplace and assumptive practice, true ecotourism must, above all, sensitize people to the beauty and the fragility of nature. These critics condemn some operators as greenwashing their operations: using the labels of "green" and "eco-friendly”, while behaving in environmentally irresponsible ways.[13]
Although academics disagree about who can be classified as an ecotourist and there is little statistical data, some estimate that more than five million ecotourists—the majority of the ecotourist population—come from the United States, with many others from Western Europe, Canada and Australia.[14]
Currently, there are various moves to create national and international ecotourism certification programs. National ecotourism certification programs have been put in place in countries such as Costa Rica,[15] Australia, Kenya, Estonia, and Sweden.[16]

Related terms[edit]
Sustainable tourism[edit]
This section is an excerpt from Sustainable tourism.[edit]
 A Canopy Walkway at Kakum National Park in Ghana, ensuring that tourists have least direct impact on the surrounding ecology. The visitor park received the Global Tourism for Tomorrow Award the following year.
Sustainable tourism is a concept that covers the complete tourism experience, including concern for economic, social and environmental issues as well as attention to improving tourists' experiences and addressing the needs of host communities.[17] Sustainable tourism should embrace concerns for environmental protection, social equity, and the quality of life, cultural diversity, and a dynamic, viable economy delivering jobs and prosperity for all.[18] It has its roots in sustainable development and there can be some confusion as to what "sustainable tourism" means.[19]: 23  There is now broad consensus that tourism should be sustainable.[20][21] In fact, all forms of tourism have the potential to be sustainable if planned, developed and managed properly.[19] Tourist development organizations are promoting sustainable tourism practices in order to mitigate negative effects caused by the growing impact of tourism, for example its environmental impacts.

The United Nations World Tourism Organization emphasized these practices by promoting sustainable tourism as part of the Sustainable Development Goals, through programs like the International Year for Sustainable Tourism for Development in 2017.[22] There is a direct link between sustainable tourism and several of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).[19]: 26  Tourism for SDGs focuses on how SDG 8 ("decent work and economic growth"), SDG 12 ("responsible consumption and production") and SDG 14 ("life below water") implicate tourism in creating a sustainable economy.[23] According to the World Travel & Tourism Travel, tourism constituted "10.3 percent to the global gross domestic product, with international tourist arrivals hitting 1.5 billion marks (a growth of 3.5 percent) in 2019" and generated $1.7 trillion export earnings yet, improvements are expected to be gained from suitable management aspects and including sustainable tourism as part of a broader sustainable development strategy.[24]
Improving sustainability[edit]
Principles[edit]
Ecotourism in both terrestrial and marine ecosystems can benefit conservation, provided the complexities of history, culture, and ecology in the affected regions are successfully navigated.[25] Catherine Macdonald and colleagues identify the factors which determine conservation outcome, namely whether: animals and their habits are sufficiently protected; conflict between people and wildlife is avoided or at least suitably mitigated; there is good outreach and education of the local population into the benefits of ecotourism; there is effective collaboration with stakeholders in the area; and there is proper use of the money generated by ecotourism to conserve the local ecology.[25][26] They conclude that ecotourism works best to conserve predators when the tourism industry is supported both politically and by the public, and when it is monitored and controlled at local, national, and international levels.[25]

Regulation and accreditation[edit]
Because the regulations of ecotourism may be poorly implemented, ecologically destructive greenwashed operations like underwater hotels, helicopter tours, and wildlife theme parks can be categorized as ecotourism along with canoeing, camping, photography, and wildlife observation. The failure to acknowledge responsible, low-impact ecotourism puts legitimate ecotourism companies at a competitive disadvantage.
Management strategies to mitigate destructive operations include but are not limited to establishing a carrying capacity, site hardening, sustainable design, visitation quotas, fees, access restrictions, and visitor education.
Many environmentalists have argued for a global standard that can be used for certification, differentiating ecotourism companies based on their level of environmental commitment, creating a standard to follow. A national or international regulatory board would enforce accreditation procedures, with representation from various groups including governments, hotels, tour operators, travel agents, guides, airlines, local authorities, conservation organizations, and non-governmental organizations.[27] The decisions of the board would be sanctioned by governments, so that non-compliant companies would be legally required to disassociate themselves from the use of the ecotourism brand.
In 1998, Crinion suggested a Green Stars System, based on criteria including a management plan, benefit for the local community, small group interaction, education value and staff training.[28] Ecotourists who consider their choices would be confident of a genuine ecotourism experience when they see the higher star rating.
In 2008 the Global Sustainable Tourism Council Criteria was launched at the IUCN World Conservation Congress.[29] The Criteria, managed by the Global Sustainable Tourism Council, created a global standard for sustainable travel and tourism and includes criteria and performance indicators for destinations, tour operators and hotels.[29] The GSTC provides accreditation through a third-party to Certification Bodies to legitimize claims of sustainability.[29]
Environmental impact assessments could also be used as a form of accreditation. Feasibility is evaluated from a scientific basis, and recommendations could be made to optimally plan infrastructure, set tourist capacity, and manage the ecology. This form of accreditation is more sensitive to site-specific conditions.
Some countries have their own certification programs for ecotourism. Costa Rica, for example, runs the GSTC-Recognized Certification of Sustainable Tourism (CST) program, which is intended to balance the effect that business has on the local environment. The CST program focuses on a company's interaction with natural and cultural resources, the improvement of quality of life within local communities, and the economic contribution to other programs of national development. CST uses a rating system that categorizes a company based upon how sustainable its operations are. CST evaluates the interaction between the company and the surrounding habitat; the management policies and operation systems within the company; how the company encourages its clients to become an active contributor towards sustainable policies; and the interaction between the company and local communities/the overall population. Based upon these criteria, the company is evaluated for the strength of its sustainability. The measurement index goes from 0 to 5, with 0 being the worst and 5 being the best.[30][31]

Labels and certification[edit]
Over 50 ecolabels on tourism exist.[32] These include (but are not limited to):

Austrian Ecolabel for Tourism
Asian Ecotourism Standard for Accommodations (AESA)
Eco-certification Malta
EarthCheck Australia
Ecotourism Australia
Ecotourism Ireland
Ecotourism Kenya
European Ecotourism Labelling Standard (EETLS)[33]
Korean Ecotourism Standard
Guidelines and education[edit]
 Ecotour guide stands on a kayak spotting dolphins and manatees, around Lido Key
An environmental protection strategy must address the issue of ecotourists removed from the cause-and-effect of their actions on the environment. More initiatives should be carried out to improve their awareness, sensitize them to environmental issues, and care about the places they visit.[14]
Tour guides are an obvious and direct medium to communicate awareness. With the confidence of ecotourists and intimate knowledge of the environment, tour guides can actively discuss conservation issues. Informing ecotourists about how their actions on the trip can negatively impact their environment and the local people. A tour guide training program in Costa Rica's Tortuguero National Park has helped mitigate negative environmental impacts by providing information and regulating tourists on the parks' beaches used by nesting endangered sea turtles.[34][35]

Small scale, slow growth and local control[edit]
The underdevelopment theory of tourism describes a new form of imperialism by multinational corporations that control ecotourism resources. These corporations finance and profit from the development of large scale ecotourism that causes excessive environmental degradation, loss of traditional culture and way of life, and exploitation of local labor. In Zimbabwe and Nepal's Annapurna region, where underdevelopment is taking place, more than 90 percent of ecotourism revenues are expatriated to the parent countries, and less than 5 percent go into local communities.[36]
The lack of sustainability highlights the need for small scale, slow growth, and locally based ecotourism. Local peoples have a vested interest in the well-being of their community, and are therefore more accountable to environmental protection than multinational corporations, though they receive very little of the profits. The lack of control, westernization, adverse impacts to the environment, loss of culture and traditions outweigh the benefits of establishing large scale ecotourism. Additionally, culture loss can be attributed to cultural commodification, in which local cultures are commodified in order to make a profit.[37]
The increased contributions of communities to locally managed ecotourism create viable economic opportunities, including high-level management positions, and reduce environmental issues associated with poverty and unemployment. Because the ecotourism experience is marketed to a different lifestyle from large scale ecotourism, the development of facilities and infrastructure does not need to conform to corporate Western tourism standards, and can be much simpler and less expensive.[38] There is a greater multiplier effect on the economy, because local products, materials, and labor are used. Profits accrue locally and import leakages are reduced.[39] The Great Barrier Reef Park in Australia reported over half of a billion dollars of indirect income in the area and added thousands of indirect jobs between 2004 and 2005.[35] However, even this form of tourism may require foreign investment for promotion or start-up. When such investments are required, it is crucial for communities to find a company or non-governmental organization that reflects the philosophy of ecotourism; sensitive to their concerns and willing to cooperate at the expense of profit. The basic assumption of the multiplier effect is that the economy starts off with unused resources, for example, that many workers are cyclically unemployed and much of industrial capacity is sitting idle or incompletely utilized. By increasing demand in the economy, it is then possible to boost production. If the economy was already at full employment, with only structural, frictional, or other supply-side types of unemployment, any attempt to boost demand would only lead to inflation. For various laissez-faire schools of economics which embrace Say's Law and deny the possibility of Keynesian inefficiency and under-employment of resources, therefore, the multiplier concept is irrelevant or wrong-headed.
As an example, consider the government increasing its expenditure on roads by $1 million, without a corresponding increase in taxation. This sum would go to the road builders, who would hire more workers and distribute the money as wages and profits. The households receiving these incomes will save part of the money and spend the rest on consumer goods. These expenditures, in turn, will generate more jobs, wages, profits, and so on with the income and spending circulating around the economy.
The multiplier effect arises because of the induced increases in consumer spending which occur due to the increased incomes — and because of the feedback into increasing business revenues, jobs, and income again. This process does not lead to an economic explosion not only because of the supply-side barriers at potential output (full employment) but because at each "round", the increase in consumer spending is less than the increase in consumer incomes. That is, the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) is less than one, so that each round some extra income goes into saving, leaking out of the cumulative process. Each increase in spending is thus smaller than that of the previous round, preventing an explosion.

Efforts to preserve ecosystems at risk[edit]
Some of the world's most exceptional biodiversity is located in the Galapagos Islands. These islands were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979, then added to UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger in 2007. IGTOA is a non-profit dedicated to preserving this unique living laboratory against the challenges of invasive species, human impact, and tourism.[40] For travelers who want to be mindful of the environment and the impact of tourism, it is recommended to utilize an operator that is endorsed by a reputable ecotourism organization. In the case of the Galapagos, IGTOA has a list[41] of the world's premiere Galapagos Islands tour companies dedicated to the lasting protection and preservation of the destination.

Natural resource management[edit]
Natural resource management can be utilized as a specialized tool for the development of ecotourism. There are several places throughout the world where a number of natural resources are abundant, but with human encroachment and habitats, these resources are depleting. Without the sustainable use of certain resources, they are destroyed, and floral and fauna species are becoming extinct. Ecotourism programs can be introduced for the conservation of these resources. Several plans and proper management programs can be introduced so that these resources remain untouched, and there are many organizations–including nonprofits–and scientists working on this field.
Natural resources of hill areas like Kurseong in West Bengal are plenty in number with various flora and fauna, but tourism for business purpose poised the situation. Researchers from Jadavpur University are presently working in this area for the development of ecotourism to be used as a tool for natural resource management.
In Southeast Asia government and nongovernmental organizations are working together with academics and industry operators to spread the economic benefits of tourism into the kampungs and villages of the region. A recently formed alliance, the South-East Asian Tourism Organisation (SEATO), is bringing together these diverse players to discuss resource management concerns.
A 2002, summit held in Quebec led to the 2008 Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria–a collaborative effort between the UN Foundation and other advocacy groups. The criteria, which are voluntary, involve the following standards: "effective sustainability planning, maximum social and economic benefits for local communities, minimum negative impacts on cultural heritage, and minimum negative impacts on the environment."[42][full citation needed]There is no enforcing agency or system of punishments.for summit.

Impact on Indigenous people and Indigenous land[edit]
Valorization of the Indigenous territories can be important for designation as a protected area, which can deter threats such as deforestation.[43] Ecotourism can help bring in revenue for indigenous peoples.[44]
However, there needs to be a proper business plan and organizational structure, which helps to ensure that the generated money from ecotourism indeed flows towards the Indigenous peoples themselves, and the protection of the Indigenous territory.[45] Debates around ecotourism focus on how profits off of Indigenous lands are enjoyed by international tourist companies, who do not share back with the people to whom those lands belong. Ecotourism offers a tourist-appealing experience of the landscape and environment, one that is different from the experience of the residents; it commodifies the lives of Indigenous people and their land which is not fair to its inhabitants.[46]
Indigenous territories are managed by governmental services (i.e. FUNAI in Brazil,[47] ...) and these governmental services can thus decide whether or not to implement ecotourism in these Indigenous territories.
Ecotourism can also bring in employment to the local people (which may be Indigenous people). Protected areas for instance require park rangers, and staff to maintain and operate the ecolodges and accommodation used by tourists. Also the traditional culture can act as a tourist attraction, and can create a source of revenue by asking payment for the showing of performances (i.e. traditional dance, ...)[48][49] Ecotourism can also help mitigate deforestation that happens when local residents, under economic stress, clear lands and create smallholder plots to grow cash crops.[50] Such land clearing hurts the environment. Ecotourism can be a sustainable and job-creating alternative for local populations.
Depending on how protected areas are set up and handled, it can lead to local people losing their homes, and mostly with no compensation.[51] Pushing people onto marginal lands with harsh climates, poor soils, lack of water, and infested with livestock and disease does little to enhance livelihoods even when a proportion of ecotourism profits are directed back into the community. Harsh survival realities and deprivement of traditional use of land and natural resources by local people can occur. Local Indigenous people may also get a strong resentment towards the change, especially if tourism has been allowed to develop with virtually no controls. This, as it can lead to too many lodges being built, and tourist vehicles may drive off-track and harass the wildlife, if no control mechanisms have been put in place and tourist vehicles can indeed be used. Vehicle use may erode and degrade land".[51]
There is a longstanding failure by the Peruvian government to acknowledge and protect Indigenous lands, and therefore the Indigenous peoples have been forced to protect their own land. The land has a better chance of staying safe and free from deforestation if the people who care about it are the ones looking over it.[52]

Criticism[edit]
Definition[edit]
In the continuum of tourism activities that stretch from conventional tourism to ecotourism, there has been a lot of contention to the limit at which biodiversity preservation, local social-economic benefits, and environmental impact can be considered "ecotourism". For this reason, environmentalists, special interest groups, and governments define ecotourism differently. Environmental organizations have generally insisted that ecotourism is nature-based, sustainably managed, conservation supporting, and environmentally educated.[14][53] The tourist industry and governments, however, focus more on the product aspect, treating ecotourism as equivalent to any sort of tourism based in nature.[14] As a further complication, many terms are used under the rubric of ecotourism.[14] Nature tourism, low impact tourism, green tourism, bio-tourism, ecologically responsible tourism, and others have been used in literature and marketing, although they are not necessarily synonymous with ecotourism.[14]
The problems associated with defining ecotourism have often led to confusion among tourists and academics. Many problems are also subject of considerable public controversy and concern because of green washing, a trend towards the commercialization of tourism schemes disguised as sustainable, nature based, and environmentally friendly ecotourism.[14] According to McLaren,[54] these schemes are environmentally destructive, economically exploitative, and culturally insensitive at its worst. They are also morally disconcerting because they mislead tourists and manipulate their concerns for the environment.[55] The development and success of such large scale, energy intensive, and ecologically unsustainable schemes are a testament to the tremendous profits associated with being labeled as ecotourism.

Negative impact[edit]
Ecotourism has become one of the fastest-growing sectors of the tourism industry.[56][full citation needed] One definition of ecotourism is "the practice of low-impact, educational, ecologically and culturally sensitive travel that benefits local communities and host countries".[2]: 71  Many of the ecotourism projects are not meeting these standards. Even if some of the guidelines are being executed, the local communities are still facing many of the negative impacts.The other negative side of ecotourism is that it transforms nature and the environment into commodities people are interested in paying and visiting. When the environment becomes a product with economic value, people try to advertise and sell it. Some of the ecotourism sites are turning to private sectors, and the government cut off their funding. Hence, they are obligated to make money on their own. Private natural parks and sites are looking for their own advantage by advertising the soundness of natural parks or coastal marines in the Caribbean. They try to show they are protecting nature and attract people interested In ecotourism. However, they will focus on the phenomenon that might be more interesting for tourists and neglect other aspects of nature when they prioritize their profits. Consequently, this policy will result in abandoning rich ecological sites or destroying those valuable sites. For example, in Montego Bay, hotel staff cut the seagrass that appeared to drive back tourists; conversely, they are crucial for local nutrient cycles.
The other problem is that the companies try to hide the truth behind the ecotourism to maintain their profit. They don't cover the fact that traveling from other countries to the natural sites burns extensive amounts of aircraft fuel. In Montego Bay and Negril, a considerable amount of run-off is released to the coastal water produced directly or indirectly by ecotourists. Hotels in Jamaica release much more wastewater than a city. The tourists generate a lot of waste that ends up in the coastal water. The indirect effect of ecotourism in Jamaica is that many people migrated to the town near the natural site because of the more job opportunities due to construction increase, resulting in destroying the environment.[57] South Africa is one of the countries that is reaping significant economic benefits from ecotourism, but the negative effects far outweigh the positive—including forcing people to leave their homes, gross violations of fundamental rights, and environmental hazards—far outweigh the medium-term economic benefits.[56][full citation needed] A tremendous amount of money and human resources continue to be used for ecotourism despite unsuccessful outcomes, and even more, money is put into public relation campaigns to dilute the effects of criticism. Ecotourism channels resources away from other projects that could contribute more sustainable and realistic solutions to pressing social and environmental problems. "The money tourism can generate often ties parks and managements to ecotourism".[58] But there is a tension in this relationship because ecotourism often causes conflict and changes in land-use rights, fails to deliver promises of community-level benefits, damages environments, and has many other social impacts. Indeed, many argue repeatedly that ecotourism is neither ecologically nor socially beneficial, yet it persists as a strategy for conservation and development[59] due to the large profits. While several studies are being done on ways to improve the ecotourism structure, some argue that these examples provide a rationale for stopping it altogether. However, there are some positive examples, among them the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA) and the Virunga National Park, as judged by WWF.[60]
The ecotourism system exercises tremendous financial and political influence. The evidence above shows that a strong case exists for restraining such activities in certain locations. Funding could be used for field studies aimed at finding alternative solutions to tourism and the diverse problems Africa faces in result of urbanization, industrialization, and the overexploitation of agriculture.[51] At the local level, ecotourism has become a source of conflict over control of land, resources, and tourism profits. In this case, ecotourism has harmed the environment and local people and has led to conflicts over profit distribution. In a perfect world, more efforts would be made towards educating tourists of the environmental and social effects of their travels. Very few regulations or laws stand in place as boundaries for the investors in ecotourism. These should be implemented to prohibit the promotion of unsustainable ecotourism projects and materials which project false images of destinations, demeaning local and indigenous culture.
Though conservation efforts in East Africa are indisputably serving the interests of tourism in the region it is important to make the distinction between conservation acts and the tourism industry.[61] Eastern African communities are not the only of developing regions to experience economic and social harms from conservation efforts. Conservation in the Southwest Yunnan Region of China has similarly brought drastic changes to traditional land use in the region. Prior to logging restrictions imposed by the Chinese Government the industry made up 80 percent of the regions revenue. Following a complete ban on commercial logging the indigenous people of the Yunnan region now see little opportunity for economic development.[62] Ecotourism may provide solutions to the economic hardships suffered from the loss of industry to conservation in the Yunnan in the same way that it may serve to remedy the difficulties faced by the Maasai. As stated, the ecotourism structure must be improved to direct more money into host communities by reducing leakages for the industry to be successful in alleviating poverty in developing regions, but it provides a promising opportunity.[63]
Drumm and Moore (2002) discuss the price increase and economic leakage in their paper; saying that prices might augment since the visitors are more capable to pay higher rates for goods and services in opposition to the locals.[64] Also, they have mentioned two solutions regarding the previous issue: (1) either a two pricing system represented as two separate price lists (the first for the locals and the second for the tourists with respect to the local's purchase power ability); (2) design unique goods and services subject only or the tourists’ consumption.[64] Leakage appears when international investors import foreign products instead of using local resources; thus, the tourists will be using international products and in-turn contributing to the outside economy rather than the local one (Drumm & Moore, 2002).[64]

Direct environmental impacts[edit]
Ecotourism operations occasionally fail to live up to conservation ideals. It is sometimes overlooked that ecotourism is a highly consumer-centered activity, and that environmental conservation is a means to further economic growth.[65]
Although ecotourism is intended for small groups, even a modest increase in population, however temporary, puts extra pressure on the local environment and necessitates the development of additional infrastructure and amenities. The construction of water treatment plants, sanitation facilities, and lodges come with the exploitation of non-renewable energy sources and the utilization of already limited local resources.[66] The conversion of natural land to such tourist infrastructure is implicated in deforestation and habitat deterioration of butterflies in Mexico and squirrel monkeys in Costa Rica.[67] In other cases, the environment suffers because local communities are unable to meet the infrastructure demands of ecotourism. The lack of adequate sanitation facilities in many East African parks results in the disposal of campsite sewage in rivers, contaminating the wildlife, livestock, and people who draw drinking water from it.[14]
Aside from environmental degradation with tourist infrastructure, population pressures from ecotourism also leaves behind garbage and pollution associated with the Western lifestyle.[54] An example of this is seen with ecotourism in Antarctica. Since it is such a remote location, it takes a lot of fuel to get there; resulting in ships producing large pollution through waste disposal and green house gas emissions. Additionally, there is a potential for oil spills from damaged ships traversing through aggressive waters filled with natural obstacles such as icebergs.[68] Although ecotourists claim to be educationally sophisticated and environmentally concerned, they rarely understand the ecological consequences of their visits and how their day-to-day activities append physical impacts on the environment. As one scientist observes, they "rarely acknowledge how the meals they eat, the toilets they flush, the water they drink, and so on, are all part of broader regional economic and ecological systems they are helping to reconfigure with their very activities."[14] Nor do ecotourists recognize the great consumption of non-renewable energy required to arrive at their destination, which is typically more remote than conventional tourism destinations. For instance, an exotic journey to a place 10,000 kilometers away consumes about 700 liters of fuel per person.[69]
Ecotourism activities are, in and of themselves, issues in environmental impact because they may disturb fauna and flora. Ecotourists believe that because they are only taking pictures and leaving footprints, they keep ecotourism sites pristine, but even harmless-sounding activities such as nature hikes can be ecologically destructive. In the Annapurna Circuit in Nepal, ecotourists have worn down the marked trails and created alternate routes, contributing to soil impaction, erosion, and plant damage.[14] Where the ecotourism activity involves wildlife viewing, it can scare away animals, disrupt their feeding and nesting sites,[14] or acclimate them to the presence of people.[14] In Kenya, wildlife-observer disruption drives cheetahs off their reserves, increasing the risk of inbreeding and further endangering the species.[14] In a study done from 1995 to 1997 off the Northwestern coast of Australia, scientists found that whale sharks' tolerance for divers and swimmers decreased. The whale sharks showed an increase in behaviors over the course of the study, such as diving, porpoising, banking, and eye rolling that are associated with distress and attempt to avoid the diver. The average time the whale sharks spent with the divers in 1995 was 19.3 minutes, but in 1997 the average time the whale sharks spent with the divers was 9.5 minutes. There was also an increase in recorded behaviors from 56% of the sharks showing any sort of diving, porpoising, eye rolling or banking in 1995 to 70.7% in 1997. Some whale sharks were also observed to have scars that were consistent with being struck by a boat.[70]

Environmental hazards[edit]
The industrialization, urbanization and agricultural practices of human society are having a serious impact on the environment. Ecotourism is now also considered to be playing a role in environmental depletion including deforestation, disruption of ecological life systems and various forms of pollution, all of which contribute to environmental degradation. For example, the number of motor vehicles crossing a park increases as tour drivers search for rare species. The number of roads disrupts the grass cover, which has serious consequences on plant and animal species. These areas also have a higher rate of disturbances and invasive species due to increasing traffic off of the beaten path into new, undiscovered areas.[51] Ecotourism also has an effect on species through the value placed on them. "Certain species have gone from being little known or valued by local people to being highly valued commodities. The commodification of plants may erase their social value and lead to overproduction within protected areas. Local people and their images can also be turned into commodities".[59] Kamuaro points out the relatively obvious contradiction that any commercial venture into unspoiled, pristine land inevitably means a higher pressure on the environment.[51] The people who live in the areas now becoming ecotourism spots have very different lifestyles than those who come to visit. Ecotourism has created many debates based on if the economic benefits are worth the possible environmental sacrifices.[71]

Who benefits?[edit]
Most forms of ecotourism are owned by foreign investors and corporations that provide few benefits to the local people. An overwhelming majority of profits are put into the pockets of investors instead of reinvestment into the local economy or environmental protection leading to further environmental degradation. The limited numbers of local people who are employed in the economy enter at its lowest level and are unable to live in tourist areas because of meager wages and a two-market system.[14]
In some cases, the resentment by local people results in environmental degradation. As a highly publicized case, the Maasai nomads in Kenya killed wildlife in national parks but are now helping the national park to save the wildlife to show aversion to unfair compensation terms and displacement from traditional lands.[39] The lack of economic opportunities for local people also constrains them to degrade the environment as a means of sustenance.[14] The presence of affluent ecotourists encourage the development of destructive markets in wildlife souvenirs, such as the sale of coral trinkets on tropical islands and animal products in Asia, contributing to illegal harvesting and poaching from the environment. In Suriname, sea turtle reserves use a very large portion of their budget to guard against these destructive activities.

Eviction of indigenous people[edit]
Main article: Fortress conservation
Fortress conservation is a conservation model based on the belief that biodiversity protection is best achieved by creating protected areas where ecosystems can function in isolation from human disturbance.[72] It is argued that money generated from ecotourism is the motivating factor to drive indigenous inhabitants off the land.[73] Up to 250,000 people worldwide have been forcibly evicted from their homes to make way for conservation projects since 1990, according to the UN special rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples.[74]

Mismanagement by government[edit]
While governments are typically entrusted with the administration and enforcement of environmental protection, they often lack the commitment or capability to manage ecotourism sites. The regulations for environmental protection may be vaguely defined, costly to implement, hard to enforce, and uncertain in effectiveness.[75] Government regulatory agencies, are susceptible to making decisions that spend on politically beneficial but environmentally unproductive projects. Because of prestige and conspicuousness, the construction of an attractive visitor's center at an ecotourism site may take precedence over more pressing environmental concerns like acquiring habitat, protecting endemic species, and removing invasive ones.[14] Finally, influential groups can pressure, and sway the interests of the government to their favor. The government and its regulators can become vested in the benefits of the ecotourism industry which they are supposed to regulate, causing restrictive environmental regulations and enforcement to become more lenient.
Management of ecotourism sites by private ecotourism companies offers an alternative to the cost of regulation and deficiency of government agencies. It is believed that these companies have a self-interest in limited environmental degradation because tourists will pay more for pristine environments, which translates to higher profit. However, theory indicates that this practice is not economically feasible and will fail to manage the environment.
The model of monopolistic competition states that distinctiveness will entail profits, but profits will promote imitation. A company that protects its ecotourism sites is able to charge a premium for the novel experience and pristine environment. But when other companies view the success of this approach, they also enter the market with similar practices, increasing competition and reducing demand. Eventually, the demand will be reduced until the economic profit is zero. A cost-benefit analysis shows that the company bears the cost of environmental protection without receiving the gains. Without economic incentive, the whole premise of self-interest through environmental protection is quashed; instead, ecotourism companies will minimize environment related expenses and maximize tourism demand.[14]
The tragedy of the commons offers another model for economic unsustainability from environmental protection, in ecotourism sites utilized by many companies.[76] Although there is a communal incentive to protect the environment, maximizing the benefits in the long run, a company will conclude that it is in their best interest to utilize the ecotourism site beyond its sustainable level. By increasing the number of ecotourists, for instance, a company gains all the economic benefit while paying only a part of the environmental cost. In the same way, a company recognizes that there is no incentive to actively protect the environment; they bear all the costs, while the benefits are shared by all other companies. The result, again, is mismanagement.
Taken together, the mobility of foreign investment and lack of economic incentive for environmental protection means that ecotourism companies are disposed to establishing themselves in new sites once their existing one is sufficiently degraded.
In addition, the systematic literature review conducted by Cabral and Dhar (2019) have identified several challenges due to slow progression of ecotourism initiatives such as (a) economic leakages, (b) lack of government involvement, (c) skill deficiency among the local communities, (d) absence of disseminating environmental education, (e) sporadic increase in pollution, (f) conflict between tourism management personnel and local communities and (g) inadequate infrastructure development.[77]

Case studies[edit]
The purpose of ecotourism is to engage tourists in low impact, non-consumptive and locally oriented environments in order to maintain species and habitats — especially in underdeveloped regions. While some ecotourism projects, including some found in the United States, can support such claims, many projects have failed to address some of the fundamental issues that nations face in the first place. Consequently, ecotourism may not generate the very benefits it is intended to provide to these regions and their people, and in some cases leaving economies in a state worse than before.[78]
The following case studies illustrate the rising complexity of ecotourism and its impacts, both positive and negative, on the environment and economies of various regions in the world.

Ecotourism in Costa Rica
Ecotourism in Jordan
Ecotourism in South Africa
Ecotourism in the United States
See also[edit]

Environment portalEcology portalEarth sciences portal

Biodiversity – Variety and variability of life forms
Bioregion – Ecology terminology
Conservation biology – Study of threats to biological diversity
Conservation (ethic) – Movement to protect the biospherePages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Conservation movement – Social and political advocacy for protecting natural resources
Conservation-reliant species
Earth science – Fields of natural science related to Earth
Eco hotel – An environmentally sustainable hotel
Ecology – Study of organisms and their environment
Ecotourism in Africa
Ecotourism in the Amazon rainforest – Large rainforest in South AmericaPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Ecotourism routes in Europe
Ecomuseum – Museum focused on the identity of a place
Ecosystem – Community of living organisms together with the nonliving components of their environment
Environmental movement – Movement for addressing environmental issues
Environmental protection – Practice of protecting the natural environment
Geotourism – Tourism associated with geological attractions and destinations
Green hunting
Habitat conservation – Management practice for protecting types of environments
Hypermobility (travel)
Market governance mechanism
Natural capital – World's stock of natural resources
Natural environment – Living and non-living things on Earth
Natural resource – Resources that exist without actions of humankind
Renewable resource – Natural resource that is replenished relatively quickly
Shark tourism – Tourism industry based on viewing sharks in their natural habitat
Sustainable development – Mode of human development
Sustainability – Goal of people safely co-existing on Earth
Overtourism

References[edit]


^ "What is (not) Ecotourism? | Global Ecotourism Network (GEN)". www.globalecotourismnetwork.org. Retrieved 2020-08-17.

^ a b Honey, Martha (2008). Ecotourism and Sustainable Development: Who Owns Paradise? (Second ed.). Washington, DC: Island Press. ISBN 978-1-59726-125-8.

^ "Ecotourism vs Sustainable Tourism". Integra: developing impact from opportunity. September 1, 2021. Archived from the original on 2021-09-01.

^ *Ṣadrī, Bahrām Nikūʼī (2010). مبانى زمين‌گردشگرى با تأکيد بر ايران [Fundamentals of Geotourism With a Special Emphasis on Iran] (in Persian). Tehran: SAMT. ISBN 978-964-530-415-5. OCLC 889667013. Introduction available in English at Sadry, Bahram N. "Introduction to Fundamentals of Geotourism With a Special Emphasis on Iran". OpenEdition Journals. Retrieved 2021-04-23.

^ Randall, A. (1987). Resource economics (Second ed.). New York, USA: John Wiley & Sons.

^ Stabler, M. J. (eds.) (1997, page 45) Tourism and Sustainability: Principles to Practice. CAB International: Wallingford.

^ Weaver, David (2008). Ecotourism, 2nd Edition (2nd ed.). Wiley. p. 8. ISBN 978-0470813041.

^ Weaver, David (2008). Ecotourism, 2nd edition (2nd ed.). Wiley. pp. 124–130. ISBN 978-0470813041.

^ Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM, Version 4.0, draft entries December 2001, Oxford University Press 2009. Citing: "1973 Ecol. Interpretative Map, Ottawa–North Bay (Canad. Forestry Service) (heading) Ecotour of the Trans-Canada Highway, Ottawa-North Bay", and "1982 (title) Ecological tourism (ecotourism): a new viewpoint (U.N. F.A.O. & Econ. Comm. for Europe)".

^ "Claus-Dieter Hetzer Obituary ( - ) - Pleasant Hill, CA - Contra Costa Times". Legacy.com.

^ David B. Weaver, The Encyclopedia of Ecotourism, Cabi Publishing, 2001, p. 5.

^ Ecotourism Australia

^ "Greenwashing In Tourism: What Is It And How To Avoid It". Clean Travel Connect. Clean Travel Pty Ltd. Retrieved 18 February 2021.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Tuohino, Anja; Hynonen, Anne (2001). "Ecotourism—imagery and reality. Reflections on concepts and practices in Finnish rural tourism". Nordia Geographical Publications. 30 (4): 21–34.

^ "Costa Rica Achieves Global Sustainable Tourism Council Recognition". TravelPulse. Retrieved 2020-10-28.

^ Haaland, Hanne; Aas, Øystein (2010). "Eco‐tourism Certification – Does it Make a Difference? A Comparison of Systems from Australia, Costa Rica and Sweden". Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism. 10 (3): 375–385. doi:10.1080/15022250.2010.486262. S2CID 20774227.

^ "Sustainable development | UNWTO". www.unwto.org. Retrieved 2020-09-25.

^ Zeng, L. Economic Development and Mountain Tourism Research from 2010 to 2020: Bibliometric Analysis and Science Mapping Approach. Sustainability 2022, 14, 562. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010562.

^ a b c Fennell, David A.; Cooper, Chris (2020). Sustainable Tourism: Principles, Contexts and Practices. Bristol, Blue Ridge Summit: Multilingual Matters. pp. 198, 234. doi:10.21832/9781845417673. ISBN 978-1-84541-767-3. S2CID 228913882.

^ Peeters P., Gössling S., Ceron J.P., Dubois G., Patterson T., Richardson R.B., Studies E. (2004). The Eco-efficiency of Tourism.

^ Bramwell, B., & Lane, B. (1993). Sustainable tourism: An evolving global approach. Journal of sustainable tourism, 1(1), 1-5.

^ Tourism and the Sustainable Development Goals – Journey to 2030, Highlights. World Tourism Organization. 2017-12-18. doi:10.18111/9789284419340. ISBN 978-92-844-1934-0.

^ "Tourism & Sustainable Development Goals – Tourism for SDGs". Retrieved 2021-01-10.

^ "Travel & Tourism Economic Impact | World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC)". wttc.org. Retrieved 2022-10-21.

^ a b c Macdonald, Catherine; Gallagher, Austin J.; Barnett, Adam; Brunnschweiler, Juerg; Shiffman, David S.; Hammerschlag, Neil (2017). "Conservation potential of apex predator tourism". Biological Conservation. 215: 132–141. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2017.07.013.

^ "What is an Ecolodge? 9 Best Ecolodges in the world - SmartXpat". smartxpat.com. 2022-11-18. Retrieved 2022-11-22.

^ Elper-Wood, M. (1998). Ecotourism at a Crossroads: charting the way forward. Nairobi, Kenya: The final report from the Conference of Ecotourism at the Crossroads.

^ Crinion, D. (1998). South Australian tourism strategy and the role of ecotourism. Adelaide, Australia: Down to Earth planning for an out-of-the-ordinary industry, presented at the South Australian Ecotourism Forum.

^ a b c Hocking. "About GSTC". Global Sustainable Tourism Council (GSTC). Archived from the original on 2020-07-10. Retrieved 2021-03-24.

^ Stater, Adam. "Ecotourism in Costa Rica".

^ Stater, Adam. "The Certification of Sustainable Tourism".

^ Ecolabels on tourism

^ EETLS

^ Jacobson, Susan K.; Robles, Rafael (1998). "Ecotourism, sustainable development, and conservation education: development of a tour guide training program in Tortuguero, Costa Rica". Environmental Management. 16 (6): 701–713. doi:10.1007/bf02645660. S2CID 67806838.

^ a b Weaver, D. B. (1998). Ecotourism in the Less Developed World. CABI. ISBN 978-0851992235.

^ Ziffer, K. (1989). Ecotourism: the uneasy alliance. Conservation International/Ernst and Young.

^ Johnston, Alison (2000). "Indigenous Peoples and Ecotourism: Bringing Indigenous Knowledge and Rights into the Sustainability Equation". Tourism Recreation Research. 25 (2): 89–96. doi:10.1080/02508281.2000.11014914. S2CID 168101298.

^ Soifer, Jack (2008). Entrepreneuring Sustainable Tourism. ISBN 978-989-95976-0-0.

^ a b Cater, E. (1994).  Cater, E.; Lowman, G. (eds.). Ecotourism in the third world—problems and prospects for sustainability, in Ecotourism: a sustainable option?. United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons.

^ "Challenges Facing the Galápagos Islands". igtoa.org. Retrieved 9 June 2015.

^ "Galápagos Islands Travel & Tours - Conservation & Ecotourism - IGTOA". igtoa.org. Retrieved 21 April 2017.

^ Clarkin and Kähler, p. 423

^ "The Sustainability Challenges of Indigenous Territories in Amazonia".

^ Coria, Jessica; Calfucura, Enrique (2012). "Ecotourism and the development of indigenous communities: The good, the bad, and the ugly". Ecological Economics. 73: 47–55. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.10.024.

^ Indigenous ecotourism in the Amazon: a case study of 'Casa Matsiguenka' in Manu National Park, Peru

^ Coria, Jessica; Calfucura, Enrique (January 2012). "Ecotourism and the development of indigenous communities: The good, the bad, and the ugly". Ecological Economics. 73: 47–55. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.10.024. ISSN 0921-8009.

^ A bid to legitimize invasions of Brazil’s indigenous lands faces a court challenge

^ Traditional aboriginal dances

^ Traditional aboriginal dances

^ Zwane, Alix Peterson (September 2007). "Does poverty constrain deforestation? Econometric evidence from Peru". Journal of Development Economics. 84 (1): 330–349. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2005.11.007. ISSN 0304-3878.

^ a b c d e Kamuaro, Ole (2007). "Ecotourism: suicide or development?". Voices from Africa. United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service. Retrieved 17 November 2017.

^ Warf, Barney (2010), "Indigenous and Community Conserved Areas", Encyclopedia of Geography, Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 1558–1561, doi:10.4135/9781412939591.n624, ISBN 9781412956970, retrieved 2022-05-12

^ Buckley, Ralf (1994). "A Framework for Ecotourism". Annals of Tourism Research. 21 (3): 661–665. doi:10.1016/0160-7383(94)90126-0.

^ a b McLaren, D. (1998). Rethinking tourism and ecotravel: the paving of paradise and what you can do to stop it. West Hartford, Connecticut, USA: Kamarian Press.

^ Barkin, David; Bouchez, Carlos Paillés (2002). "NGO–Community Collaboration for Ecotourism: A Strategy for Sustainable Regional Development". Current Issues in Tourism. 5 (3–4): 245–253. doi:10.1080/13683500208667921. hdl:11362/33030. S2CID 133558848.

^ a b Miller, 2007

^ Carrier, James G. (June 2010). "Protecting the Environment the Natural Way: Ethical Consumption and Commodity Fetishism". Antipode. 42 (3): 672–689. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00768.x. ISSN 0066-4812.

^ Walpole et al. 2001[full citation needed]

^ a b West, Paige (2006). Conservation is our government now : the politics of ecology in Papua New Guinea (2nd ed.). Durham: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822337492.

^ Reichelt-Zolho, Brit; Kirchgatter, Johannes (27 March 2015). "Live elephants have to be worth more". Development and Cooperation. Archived from the original on 2015-03-31. Retrieved 12 July 2021.

^ Ndaskoi, N. (2003). "The Maasai Predicament". New African. 419 (44).

^ Director: Jim Norton; Writers: Les Guthman, Jim Norton. The Yunnan Great Rivers Expedition. Snag Films. Retrieved November 29, 2012.

^ Saayman, Melville; Rossouw, Krugel (September 2012). "The impact of tourism on poverty in South Africa". Development Southern Africa. 29 (3): 462–487. doi:10.1080/0376835x.2012.706041. S2CID 153660005.

^ a b c Drumm, Andy; Moore, Alan (2002). An Introduction to Ecotourism Planning. Arlington, Virginia, USA: The Nature Conservancy.

^ Kamauro, O. (1996). Ecotourism: Suicide or Development? Voices from Africa #6: Sustainable Development, UN Non-Governmental Liaison Service. United Nations News Service.

^ Vivanco, L. (2002). "Ecotourism, Paradise lost—A Thai case study". The Ecologist. 32 (2): 28–30.

^ Isaacs, J.C. (2000). "The limited potential of ecotourism to contribute to wildlife conservation". 28 (1). The Ecologist: 61–69. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Hall, C. M.; McArthur, S. (1993-04-01). "Ecotourism in Antarctica and adjacent sub-Antarctic islands: development, impacts, management and prospects for the future". Tourism Management. 14 (2): 117–122. doi:10.1016/0261-5177(93)90044-L. ISSN 0261-5177.

^ Mellgren, Doug (2007-05-16). "Travel Experts See Worrisome Downside to Ecotourism". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2007-05-20. Retrieved 2007-05-21.

^ Norman, B. (1999). Aspects of the biology and ecotourism industry of the whale shark Rhincodon typus in North-Western Australia (MRes). Murdoch University Research Repository. pp. 1–282.

^ Wall, Geoffrey (1997-07-01). "FORUM: Is Ecotourism Sustainable?". Environmental Management. 21 (4): 483–491. doi:10.1007/s002679900044. ISSN 0364-152X. PMID 9175538. S2CID 35966965.

^ "Critique of fortress conservation". SESMAD. Retrieved 26 May 2022.

^ "Who is ordering continuous attacks against Batwa people in DRC?". Deutsche Welle. 9 April 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022.

^ "'Large-scale human rights violations' taint Congo national park project". The Guardian. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2022.

^ Baumol, W.J.; Oates, W.E. (1977). Economics, environmental policy, and quality of life. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall.

^ Hardin, Garrett (1968). "The Tragedy of the Commons". Science. 162 (3859): 1243–1248. Bibcode:1968Sci...162.1243H. doi:10.1126/science.162.3859.1243. PMID 17756331.

^ Cabral, Clement; Dhar, Rajib Lochan (2019-06-10). "Ecotourism research in India: from an integrative literature review to a future research framework". Journal of Ecotourism. 19: 23–49. doi:10.1080/14724049.2019.1625359. ISSN 1472-4049. S2CID 197805541.

^ Fennell, David A. (1999). Ecotourism: An Introduction. London, England: Routledge. p. 30. ISBN 9780203457481. OCLC 51036894.


Further reading[edit]
Burger, Joanna (2000). "Landscapes, tourism, and conservation". Science of the Total Environment. 249 (1–3): 39–49. Bibcode:2000ScTEn.249...39B. doi:10.1016/s0048-9697(99)00509-4. PMID 10813445.
Ceballos-Lascurain, H. 1996. Tourism, Ecotourism, and Protected Areas.
Larkin, T. and K. N. Kähler. 2011. "Ecotourism." Encyclopedia of Environmental Issues. Rev. ed. Pasadena: Salem Press. Vol. 2, pp. 421–424. ISBN 978-1-58765-737-5
IUCN. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature. 301 pp.
Ceballos-Lascurain, H. 1998. Ecoturismo. Naturaleza y Desarrollo Sostenible.
Duffy, Rosaleen (2000). "Shadow players: Ecotourism development, corruption and state politics in Belize". Third World Quarterly. 21 (3): 549–565. doi:10.1080/713701038. S2CID 153634543.
Gutzwiller, Kevin J.; Anderson, Stanley H. (1999). "Spatial Extent of Human-Intrusion Effects on Subalpine Bird Distributions". The Condor. 101 (2): 378–389. doi:10.2307/1370001. JSTOR 1370001.
Orams, Mark B.; Nowaczek, Agnes M.K. (2010). "Ecotourism: Principles and Practices". Annals of Tourism Research. 37: 270–271. doi:10.1016/j.annals.2009.10.007.
Orams, Mark B. (2000). "Tourists getting close to whales, is it what whale-watching is all about?". Tourism Management. 21 (6): 561–569. doi:10.1016/s0261-5177(00)00006-6.
Reguero Oxide, M. del. 1995. Ecoturismo. Nuevas Formas de Turismo en el Espacio rural. Ed. Bosch Turismo
Scheyvens, Regina (1999). "Ecotourism and the empowerment of local communities". Tourism Management. 20 (2): 245–249. doi:10.1016/s0261-5177(98)00069-7.
Buckley, Ralf (2011). "Tourism and Environment". Annual Review of Environment and Resources. 36 (1): 397–416. doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-041210-132637.
External links[edit]


Ecotourism  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage

Ecotourism at Curlie
vteAdventure travelTypes
Accessible tourism
Adjectival tourisms
Adventure recreation
Agritourism
Backpacking (travel)
Backpacking (hiking)
Bicycle touring
Camping
Cultural tourism
Ecotourism
Extreme tourism
Freighthopping
Glamping
Hiking
Hitchhiking
Jungle tourism
Kloofing
Overlanding
Picnic
Rogaining
Safari
Slum tourism
Tramping
Travel
Ultralight backpacking
Urban exploration
Volunteer travel
Wildlife tourism
Activities
Climbing
Geocaching
Geohashing
Hang gliding
Mountain biking
Mountaineering
Naturism
Nude recreation
Paragliding
Rafting
River trekking
Scuba diving
Zip-lining

vteTourismTypes
Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Backpacking
Beachgoing
Bicycle touring
Birth
Business
Culinary
Enotourism
Cultural
Archaeological
Literary
Bookstore
Tolkien
Music
Pop-culture
Dark
Disaster
Holocaust
War
Domestic
Ecotourism
Shark
Experiential
Extreme
Fashion
Garden
Genealogy
Heritage
Identity
Geotourism
Industrial
International
Volunteering
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical
MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions)
Nautical
Orphanage
Recreational drug
Religious
Christian
Halal
Kosher
Pilgrimage
Rural
Science
Sensory
Slum
Smart
Space
Lunar
Sports
Sustainable
Urban
Virtual
Visiting friends and relatives
Wellness
Wildlife
Safari
Scuba
Yoga
Hospitality industry
Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Convention center
Cruise ship
Destination spa
Front desk
Guest house
Guest ranch
Heuhotel
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hostel
Hotel
Manager
Inn
Motel
Pension
Referral chain
Resort
Hotel
Island
Seaside
Ski
Town
Restaurant
Terminology
College tour
Convention (meeting)
Destination marketing organization
Escorted tour
Excursion
Factory tour
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday
Honeymoon
Hypermobility
Journey planner
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Tour bus service
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel visa
Travel warning
Travel website
Vacation
Visitor center
Travel literature
Guide book
Outdoor literature
Tourism journals
Travel magazines
Wikivoyage
Trade associations
American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
European Travel Commission
Historical Archive on Tourism
Life Beyond Tourism
Musement
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor
Trade fairs and events
Akwaaba African Travel Market
Arabian Travel Market
Festival del Viaggio
FITUR
ITB Berlin
World Tourism Day
Issues
Heritage commodification
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism
Impacts of tourism
Leakage effect
Overtourism
Tourism improvement district
Tourist tax
Lists
Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Cities by international visitors
Convention and exhibition centers
Cruise lines
Hotels
Largest
Motels
Passenger airlines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country

 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vtePopulationMajor topics
Demographics of the world
Demographic transition
Estimates of historical world population
Population growth
Population momentum
World population
Biology andrelated topics
Population biology
Population decline
Population density
Physiological density
Population dynamics
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth
Populationecology
Earth's energy budget
I = P × A  × T
Kaya identity
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World3 model
Society and population
Biocapacity
Human overpopulation
Malthusian catastrophe
Human population planning
Compulsory sterilization
Family planning
One-child policy
Two-child policy
Overconsumption
Population ethics
Antinatalism
Reproductive rights
Sustainable population
Zero population growth
Publications
Population and Environment
Population and Development Review
Lists
Population and housing censuses by country
Largest cities
World population milestones
6 billion
7
8
Population concern organizations
Events andorganizations
7 Billion Actions
Church of Euthanasia
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations world population conferences
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Conference
World Population Day
World Population Foundation
Related topics
Bennett's law
Green Revolution
Human impact on the environment
Migration
Sustainability

 Commons
 Category

Authority control National
Germany
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
2





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecotourism&oldid=1142367919"
Categories: EcotourismAdventure travelEcological economicsNatural resource managementTypes of tourismHidden categories: CS1 Persian-language sources (fa)All articles with incomplete citationsArticles with incomplete citations from May 2016CS1 errors: missing periodicalArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributedWikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from January 2019Articles with excerptsArticles with incomplete citations from September 2018Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated linkPages using Sister project links with default searchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with Curlie linksArticles with GND identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with EMU identifiers






 This page was last edited on 2 March 2023, at 00:55 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





