



Cuttack - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Etymology







2History







3Geography


				Toggle Geography subsection
			




3.1Climate









4Culture


				Toggle Culture subsection
			




4.1Pilgrimage sites





4.1.1Cuttack Chandi Temple







4.1.2Dhabaleshwar Temple







4.1.3Paramhansa Nath Temple







4.1.4Baba Ramdev Temple







4.1.5Qadam e Rasool







4.1.6Jama Masjid







4.1.7Gurdwara Guru Nanak Daatan Sahib







4.1.8Bukhari Baba Dargah







4.1.9Digambar Jain Mandir







4.1.10The Church of Epiphany









4.2Festivals







4.3Cuisine









5Art and literature


				Toggle Art and literature subsection
			




5.1Drama and theater culture







5.2Libraries, Art Galleries and Auditoriums







5.3Odia film industry







5.4Movie theatres









6Demographics


				Toggle Demographics subsection
			




6.1Population







6.2Literacy







6.3Religion







6.4Languages









7Civic administration


				Toggle Civic administration subsection
			




7.1Political and municipal administration







7.2Police and judicial administration







7.3Utilities, NGOs and charitable organisations









8Economy


				Toggle Economy subsection
			




8.1Traditional Industries







8.2Industrial corridor and Special Economic Zone







8.3Service sector







8.4Media









9Healthcare







10Education


				Toggle Education subsection
			




10.1Schools and colleges in Cuttack







10.2Universities and institutes of higher education and research





10.2.1National Law University Odisha (NLUO)







10.2.2Madhusudan Law University (MLU)







10.2.3Ravenshaw University







10.2.4Sri Sri University







10.2.5National Rice Research Institute (NRRI)







10.2.6Srirama Chandra Bhanja Medical College and Hospital (SCBMCH)







10.2.7Swami Vivekananda National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research (SVNIRTAR)







10.2.8Sardar Vallabhbahai Patel Post Graduate Institute of Paediatrics (SVPPGIP)







10.2.9Biju Pattnaik Film and Television Institute of Odisha (BPFTIO)











11Transport


				Toggle Transport subsection
			




11.1Air







11.2Road







11.3Rail







11.4Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS)









12Sports


				Toggle Sports subsection
			




12.1Barabati Sports Complex







12.2Jawaharlal Nehru Indoor Stadium







12.3Satyabrata Stadium







12.4Jagatpur Water Sports Complex









13Historical places of interest


				Toggle Historical places of interest subsection
			




13.1Barabati Fort and Cantonment







13.2Chudangagarh Fort







13.3Netaji Birthplace Museum







13.4Madhusudan Sangrahalaya







13.5Anand Bhavan Museum and Learning Centre







13.6Odisha State Maritime Museum







13.7Old Jail Complex and the Freedom Fighter's Memorial







13.8Swaraj Ashram







13.9Maratha barracks







13.10Salt House







13.11Lal Bagh Palace







13.12Kanika Rajbati







13.13Gora Kabar Cemetery







13.14Shree Gopal Krishna Goshala







13.15Lalitgiri







13.16Olasuni Hill







13.17Parks and gardens





13.17.1Ocean World water park







13.17.2CMC Deer park







13.17.3Recreational parks







13.17.4Nandankanan Zoological Park and Botanical Gardens







13.17.5Chandaka Elephant Sanctuary







13.17.6Naraj Peacock Valley







13.17.7Mahanadi River Boating









13.18Lakes and reservoirs





13.18.1Deojhar WaterFalls, Narasinghpur, Cuttack







13.18.2Anshupa Lake







13.18.3Jobra Barrage







13.18.4Naraj and Mundali Reservoirs







13.18.5Stone revetment on Mahanadi











14Notable people







15See also







16References







17External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Cuttack




60 languages



العربيةتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБеларускаяBrezhonegCatalàCebuanoČeštinaCymraegDeutschEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançaisગુજરાતીगोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni한국어हिन्दीবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীBahasa IndonesiaItalianoಕನ್ನಡKapampanganLadinLietuviųMagyarमैथिलीMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीمصرىBahasa MelayuNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語Norsk bokmålଓଡ଼ିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPolskiPortuguêsРусскийसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்తెలుగుTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


This article is about the city. For the district, see Cuttack district.


City in Odisha, IndiaCuttack
KatakaCityClockwise from top: Bali Jatra Gate, Barabati Stadium, Banasura Temple, Mahanadi Bridge, Cuttack Maa Chandi, Barabati FortNicknames: Silver City  Millennium City [1]CuttackLocation in Odisha, IndiaShow map of OdishaCuttackCuttack (India)Show map of IndiaCoordinates: 20°31′25″N 85°47′17″E﻿ / ﻿20.52361°N 85.78806°E﻿ / 20.52361; 85.78806Coordinates: 20°31′25″N 85°47′17″E﻿ / ﻿20.52361°N 85.78806°E﻿ / 20.52361; 85.78806Country IndiaState OdishaDistrictCuttackEstablished989 CEFounded byMarkat Keshari of Keshari DynastyNamed forAncient military cantonment of UtkalGovernment • TypeMunicipal Corporation • BodyCuttack Municipal Corporation (CMC) • Member of ParliamentShri Bhartruhari Mahatab (BJD) • Members of Legislative AssemblyBarabati-Cuttack : Shri Mohammed Moquim, INC
Choudwar-Cuttack : Shri Souvic Biswal, BJD

Cuttack Sadar (SC) : Shri Chandra Sarathi Behera, BJD • Municipal CommissionerNikhil Pavan Kalyan, IAS • Deputy Commissioner of PolicePinak Mishra, IPSArea[2] • City192.5 km2 (74.3 sq mi) • Rank2nd in Odisha .Elevation36 m (118 ft)Population (2011)[3] • City606,007 • RankIndia 72nd, Odisha 2nd • Density3,100/km2 (8,200/sq mi) • Metro666,702DemonymKatakiaLanguages • OfficialOdiaTime zoneUTC+5:30 (IST)ZIP code(s)7530xx/754xxxTelephone code0671Vehicle registrationOD-05UN/LOCODEIN CUTWebsitecmccuttack.gov.in
Cuttack (/ˈkʌtəkʌ/ (listen), or officially Kataka [ˈkɔʈɔkɔ]) in Odia, is the former capital and the second largest city in the Indian state of Odisha. It is the headquarters of the Cuttack district. The name of the city is an anglicised form of the Odia and Sanskrit name Kataka which literally means The Fort, a reference to the ancient Barabati Fort around which the city initially developed. Cuttack is known as the Millennium City as well as the Silver City due to its history of 1000 years and famous silver filigree works. The Orissa High Court[4] is located there. It is the commercial capital of Odisha which hosts many trading and business houses in and around the city. Cuttack is famous for its Durga puja which is one of the most important festivals of Odisha. Cuttack is also the birthplace of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. The city is categorised as a Tier-II city as per the ranking system used by Government of India.[5][6][7]
The old and the most important part of the city is centred on a strip of land between the Kathajodi River and the Mahanadi River, bounded on the south-east by Old Jagannath Road.[8] The city, being a part of the Cuttack Municipal Corporation consisting of 59 wards.[9] Cuttack stretches from Phulnakhara across the Kathajodi in the south to Choudwar in north across the Birupa River, while in the east it begins at Kandarpur and runs west as far as Naraj. Four rivers including Mahanadi and its distributaries Kathajodi, Kuakhai, Birupa run through the city. Further Kathajodi is distributed into Devi and Biluakhai which often makes the geographical area look like fibrous roots.
Cuttack and Bhubaneswar are often referred to as the Twin-Cities of Odisha. The metropolitan area formed by the two cities has a population of 1.862 million in 2018.[10] 
Cuttack, an unplanned city, is characterized by a maze of streets, lanes and by-lanes which have given it the nickname of a city with Bauna Bazaar, Tepana Galee and i.e. 52 markets and 53 streets.


Etymology[edit]
The name Cuttack is an anglicised form of Kataka (Odia: କଟକ) which is derived from Sanskrit meaning capital, fort and military establishment or a cantonment.[11] The city was known as Bidanasi Kataka (meaning Bidanasi Military Base) during the days when Barabati Fort was in existence. Bidanasi is now one of the localities of the city.[12]

History[edit]
The earliest written history of Cuttack may go back to the Keshari dynasty.[11] As stated by the historian Andrew Stirling, present-day Cuttack was established as a military cantonment by king Nrupa Keshari of Keshari dynasty in 989 CE. Stirling based his opinion on the Madala Panji, a chronicle of the Jagannatha temple of Puri.[13] The reign of Maharaja Markata Keshari was distinguished for the stone embank built to protect the new capital from flood in 1002 CE.
Historical and archaeological evidence suggests Cuttack becoming capital of a kingdom founded by Raja Anangabhimadeva III of Ganga dynasty in 1211 CE.[14] After the end of Ganga rule, Odisha passed to the hands of the Suryavamsi Gajapati dynasty (1434–1541 CE) under whom Cuttack continued to be the capital of Odisha.[14] After the death of Raja Mukunda deva,[15] the last Hindu king of Orissa, Cuttack first came under Muslim rule and later under Mughals,[16] who made Cuttack the seat of the new Orissa Subah (imperial top-level province) under Shah Jahan.
By 1750, Cuttack came under the Maratha Empire and it grew fast as a business centre being the convenient point of contact between the Bhonsale Marathas of Nagpur and the English merchants of Bengal. The term "Attock te Cuttack" (Attock to Cuttack) was first used to describe the extent of the Maratha Empire after they conquered Cuttack in 1750 and Attock in 1758. It was occupied by the British in 1803 and later became the capital of Odisha division in 1816. From 1948 onwards, when the capital was shifted to Bhubaneswar, the city remained the administrative headquarters for the state of Odisha.
The introduction of the Sharadiya Utsav tradition in the city dates back to the visit of Saint Chaitanya in the 16th century when the consecration of the idol of Durga by using the mask pattern was conducted in his presence at Binod Behari Devi Mandap.[citation needed]
The remains of the old moated Barabati Fort still exist in the heart of Cuttack.[17]

Geography[edit]
Cuttack is located at 20°31′23″N 085°47′17″E﻿ / ﻿20.52306°N 85.78806°E﻿ / 20.52306; 85.78806[18] and has an average elevation of 36 metres (118 ft). The city is spread across an area of 192.5 km2 (74 sq mi). The city, being a Cuttack Municipal Corporation which consists of 59 wards. The city stretches from Phulnakhara in south to Choudwar in north and Kandarpur in east to naraj in west while main city is located at the apex of the Mahanadi River delta.  Apart from Mahanadi, four of its distributaries also run through the city. The distributaries include Mahanadi, Kathajodi, Kuakhai and Birupa where Kathajodi further has two distributaries; the right being Devi while the left is Biluakhai. Mahanadi runs through the city on the northern side separating the main city from the Jagatpur Industrial Area. The Kathajodi river forms a riverine island of Bayalis Mouza (42 Wards) after separating the main city from Gopalpur. The Kuakhai river separates the southern part of the city into two-halves, namely Pratap Nagri and the new township of Naranpur. The Kuakhai runs throughout the south of the city along Phulnakhara before entering Bhubaneswar. The Birupa river runs through the north of Jagatpur Industrial Area separating it from Choudwar. There are numerous ponds known as (pokharis) in the city that store rain water. The Mahanadi provides much of the drinking water to the city.[citation needed] Recent growth of the city has resulted in expansion across the Kathajodi River and a newer township towards the head of the delta formed between the tributary Kathajodi river and the main river Mahanadi has come up by the name of Markat Nagar (popularly known as CDA by the local residents) which is spread across 2000 acres. CDA has 15 sectors out of which 11 are residential & has population around 150,000. Jagatpur & Mahanadi Vihar are the other two townships in the city. Mahanadi Vihar is the first satellite city project in Odisha. Cuttack is referred to as a city with Baaban Bazaar, Teppan Galee i.e. this is the city of 52 markets and 53 streets which is told by people of Odisha for the largeness of this city.[citation needed] Naranpur is another satellite township coming up in Trishulia, on the other side of Kathajodi River.

Climate[edit]
Cuttack experiences a tropical wet and dry climate. The summer season is from March to June when the climate is hot and humid. The temperature around this season is 35 °C to 40 °C Thunderstorms are common at the height of the summer. The monsoon months are from July to October when the city receives most of its rainfall from the South West Monsoon. The annual rainfall is around 1,597.9 millimetres (159.79 cm). Temperatures are considerably lower during the rainy season, averaging around 30 °C. The winter season from November to February is characterised by mild temperatures and occasional showers. The winter months feature chilly northerly winds which bring down the temperature to around 15 °C, though the bright sunshine helps maintain the pleasant weather. Temperatures may exceed 45 °C at the height of summer and may fall below 10 °C in winter. The highest recorded temperature is 47.7 °C (117.9 °F) recorded on 2 May 1957, and the lowest is 5.8 °C (42.4 °F) recorded on 7 January 1986.[19]
Due to the proximity to coast, the city is prone to cyclones from the Bay of Bengal. One such cyclone struck Cuttack in 1971, resulting in more than 10,000 deaths in the state.[20] The Bureau of Indian Standards places the city inside seismic zone III on a scale ranging from I to V in order of increasing susceptibility to earthquakes.[21] The United Nations Development Programme reports that there is "very high damage risk" from winds and cyclones.[21] The 1999 Odisha cyclone caused major damage to the city claiming many lives.[22]




Climate data for Cuttack (1981–2010, extremes 1901–2010)


Month

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Year


Record high °C (°F)

36.6(97.9)

40.1(104.2)

42.8(109.0)

45.0(113.0)

47.7(117.9)

47.2(117.0)

42.3(108.1)

38.4(101.1)

41.1(106.0)

40.0(104.0)

36.9(98.4)

33.7(92.7)

47.7(117.9)


Average high °C (°F)

28.8(83.8)

31.8(89.2)

35.3(95.5)

37.2(99.0)

37.2(99.0)

35.1(95.2)

32.5(90.5)

32.0(89.6)

32.7(90.9)

32.6(90.7)

30.9(87.6)

28.9(84.0)

32.9(91.2)


Average low °C (°F)

14.7(58.5)

17.8(64.0)

21.4(70.5)

23.9(75.0)

25.0(77.0)

24.8(76.6)

24.0(75.2)

24.1(75.4)

24.0(75.2)

22.3(72.1)

18.3(64.9)

14.5(58.1)

21.2(70.2)


Record low °C (°F)

5.8(42.4)

8.5(47.3)

13.0(55.4)

13.5(56.3)

16.5(61.7)

17.0(62.6)

18.2(64.8)

17.5(63.5)

17.0(62.6)

14.0(57.2)

10.0(50.0)

7.5(45.5)

5.8(42.4)


Average rainfall mm (inches)

14.0(0.55)

16.6(0.65)

23.8(0.94)

45.0(1.77)

106.0(4.17)

196.0(7.72)

361.4(14.23)

365.0(14.37)

258.4(10.17)

176.2(6.94)

31.4(1.24)

4.1(0.16)

1,597.9(62.91)


Average rainy days

0.8

1.8

2.0

2.6

5.1

10.8

14.6

16.2

12.0

6.3

1.9

0.5

74.3


Average relative humidity (%) (at 17:30 IST)

54

50

52

58

61

70

79

81

79

71

63

57

65


Source: India Meteorological Department[23][24][25]


Culture[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Pilgrimage sites[edit]
 Cuttack Chandi Deity
Cuttack Chandi Temple[edit]
Dedicated to the Goddess Chandi, the presiding deity of Cuttack. The Cuttack Chandi Temple is located in proximity to the banks of the Mahanadi River. It is famous for its annual Durga Puja and Kali Puja festivals. The Durga Puja festivities are prominent in Maa Katak Chandi temple which takes place for 16 days starting from dark fortnight of Ashwina Krishna Ashtami till Ashwina Shukla navami and Vijayadashami. The Goddess popularly called as Maa Kataka Chandi, sits and rules on the heart of the ancient city. Gada Chandi Temple situated within the premises of the Barabati Fort is one of the oldest temples in Cuttack and is believed to be the older temple of Cuttack Chandi before her shift to the present Cuttack Chandi Temple.

Dhabaleshwar Temple[edit]
Dedicated to the worship of Lord Shiva Dhabaleswar Temple is situated on an exotic island in the Mahanadi River and is embellished with stone carvings that date back to the early 10th and 11th century.  The island is connected to the mainland on the other side by a suspension bridge which is the first and only of its kind in the state.

Paramhansa Nath Temple[edit]
 Dhabaleswara BridgeParamhansa Nath Temple, Biribat built, 11th A.D. 4 km from the Cuttack - Paradeep Road. Approach from OMP square, towards Nuabazar and keep going until you see a sign board of the temple to take a right. This is situated right on banks of River Kathajodi. The other approach would be from the Panchamukhi Hanuman temple at Khapuria. Road along the river bank will lead you to the temple Another hidden Gem of Katak, and it is still standing upright 80 ft for 1000 years. This is a five-chambered rekha and pidha shrine. The Vimana is of Pancharatha rekha style.  The doorjambs of the vimana and the bhogomandapa portray sculptures of the navagraha and dvarapalas. The Plinth of the temple exhibits sculptures portraying war scenes, elephants and horses in procession, decorated swans.  In the sanctum is a Patal-Phuta Shiva Linga. There is a wooden canopy and possibly added sometime in the mid-15th or 16th century. Other deities around the temple are Parvati, Kartikeya and Ganesh. A big bull figure and a Rama-abhisekha images are found on the northern wall of the temple. Two Vishnu images are found on the outer walls of the temple. Built by Somavanshi Dynasty.
Baba Ramdev Temple[edit]
 Baba Ramdev Temple
The temple is located beside the Cuttack – Bhubaneswar national highway. It is built entirely of white marble. Ramdev Pir is a Hindu folk deity of Rajasthan in India. Ramdev is considered to be an incarnation of Krishna. He was said to have had miraculous powers, and his fame reached far and wide. Legend has it that five Pirs from Mecca came to test Ramdev's powers.

Qadam e Rasool[edit]
Believed to be for the veneration of Muhammad. It comes from the belief started early in Islam that when Muhammad stepped on a rock his footprint left an imprint. This belief was not accepted by Wahabbi influenced sub-sects of Islam. However, the idea was disseminated widely and led to the creation of many shrines around such imprints one of them being situated in Cuttack.

Jama Masjid[edit]
Built during the Mughal era. Earlier there used to be a Madrasa in this mosque. However, since a decade, the Madrasa is shifted out. The neighbourhood surrounding the Jama Masjid is inhabited predominantly by Hindus.

Gurdwara Guru Nanak Daatan Sahib[edit]
A holy historical Sikh shrine, the Daatan Sahib Gurdwara is where the first Sikh Guru, Shree Guru Nanak, halted on his way to Puri. It is believed that a tree branch planted by him after using it as a tooth cleaner still flourishes here, hence the name Daatan Sahib. Bukhari Baba Peer
Bukhari Baba Dargah[edit]
Bukhari Baba Dargah, one of the well known dargahs in the silver city, draws a huge crowd, especially on Thursdays. People from diverse religions come here to offer prayer to get their wishes fulfilled. The ancient dargah of Sufi saint Sayeed Ali Saheed Bukhari, popularly known as Bukhari Baba's majjar, is situated near Barabati Fort in Cuttack. The structure with a white dome is an example of Mughal architecture built in 1468. It attracts devotees from across the state. Not only Muslim but even people of other religions are regular 'Murid' of the 'dargah'. Around two lakh devotees visit the sacred shrine annually.

Digambar Jain Mandir[edit]
There are four Jain temples in Cuttack City which were established by Digambar and Swetambar Jain Sects who had migrated to Cuttack from Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. These are situated at Choudhury Bazar, Jaunliapatty, Alamchand Bazar and Kaji Bazar, Tirthankara images have been installed in these temples. Digambar Jain temple at Choudhury Bazar was constructed during the second half of the 20th century and is remarkable for its artistic design.

The Church of Epiphany[edit]
Although there are several churches in Cuttack, the oldest among them all is the Church of Epiphany on the Cantonment Road built in the year 1865. This iconic brick structure is an example of the British era colonial architecture.  Goddess Durga Idol in Chaudhury BazarOther famous temples in Cuttack are Gada Chandi Temple, Khannagar Sai Mandir, Amareswar Temple, Raghunath Jew Temple, Ramakriskna Mission, Maa Jhanjhirimangala Temple, Dolamundai Jagannath Temple, Chahata Ram Mandir, Badambadi Siddhivinayak Temple, Khannagar Kali Mandir, Kalia Boda Shani Temple, etc. Cuttack also houses many churches including Holy Rosary Church and Oriya Baptist Church.
Festivals[edit]
Durga Puja: Cuttack is famous throughout the nation for its Durga puja celebrations. Nearly 200 earthen idols of Goddess Durga are prepared by the different Puja Committees of the city to worship Goddess Durga The speciality Cuttack Durga Puja are its Durga puja Suna Medha, in which the idols are adorned with huge amounts of gold and silver, with localities trying to outsmart each other by constructing more attractive idols. Cuttack celebrates Durga Puja with full energy on Maha Saptami, Maha Ashtami, Maha Navami and on Vijaya Dashami or Dussehra by burning an effigy of the demon Ravana. People from all of Odisha and nearby states visit Cuttack during this period observe the famous festival.
Boita Bandana: This festival is celebrated on the last day of the holy Hindu month of Kartik. On this auspicious day people flow miniature boitas or model boats in the Mahanadi and Kathajodi rivers to pay homage to the ancient merchants of Kalinga Kingdom. This day also marks the beginning of Bali Jatra. This festival is similar to the Masakapam Kepesih festival of Bali,[26] and to the Loi Krathong festival of Thailand, both of which involve ritualistic floating of model boats around the same time of year
Bali Jatra: The festival which the people of Cuttack await the most is the Bali Jatra.[27] Bali Yatra is supposedly the second largest trade festival in Asia and the largest in India. The name Bali Jatra literally means A Voyage to Bali. In olden times, merchants used to trade with South-East Asian Island Countries of Bali, Java, Sumatra, Borneo. Whatever items they brought from those places after trading Oriya goods used to be put up for sale in the capital (which was then Cuttack). People from all over the state and beyond used to come to Cuttack to buy these items. Bali Jatra is the festival of continuing this ancient tradition. It is held every year in November on the banks of the Mahanadi. Many stalls are set up selling both local and exotic goods. People from all over Odisha come to the Bali Jatra to buy items, as was the custom back in those days.
Kali puja: This festival is dedicated to the Hindu Goddess Kali and is celebrated on the new moon day of the Hindu month of Kartik. It coincides with the pan-Indian festival of Diwali amidst the bursting of firecrackers.  Bali Jatra Entrance Gate
Kartikeshwar Puja: The puja in Cuttack is organized by the puja committees of Cuttack. This festival is observed to worship Kartikeya, the eldest son of Lord Shiva. Nowhere else except Sabarimala is the Kartikeswar puja carried out with so much elan.
Bada Osha: This is unique to Dhabaleswar Temple. Special Bhoga namely Gaja and Tarana are prepared on this day for the worshippers.
Manabasa Gurubara was unique of Cuttack Odisha later celebrated by east Odisha, west Odisha is worship to goddess Laxmi.
Kite flying is also celebrated with much enthusiasm and energy in the city. Kite-flying culminates with the Makar Sankranti, with kite-flying competitions being held all over. Cuttack is the first city in the Eastern India to introduce kite-flying.
All the other regular Indian festivals like Ratha Yatra, Raja, Ganesh Chaturthi, Vasant Panchami, Holi, Diwali, Chhath, Eid, Good Friday, Christmas, and the numerous festivals are celebrated here.

Cuisine[edit]
 Cuttack Dahibara Aloodam
Cuttack is the street food capital of Odisha. It is famous for its Dahibara Aludam, a local delicacy made using black gram (a cousin of the mung bean) and potato curry.Chhena poda and Rasagulla from Salepur by Bikalananda Kar are local desserts made of unripened curd cheese made from buffalo or cow milk. Apart from Dahibara Aloodam: Chaat, Gupchup (puchuka/panipuri) and samosas rule the streets. The city has major food joints like Chandini Chowk, Bidanasi, Stadium Road, Buxi Bazar, Dolamundai, Choudhary Bazar, etc. Thunka puri is a famous delicacy available only during Baliyatra. Traditional Oriya food such as Dahi-Pakhal (rice soaked in water with yogurt and seasonings) is considered a body coolant, accompanied by Badi chura or saga are consumed during the months of April–June.
Due to the quantity of Muslim households in the city, traditional Islamic and Mughlai cuisines like Biriyani, Tandoor and Sheer kurma are also popular among the denizens. Due to its close proximity to Paradip and Mahanadi catchment area, Cuttack is one of the major producer and consumer of fish. Fish curry is a popular dish among Odia households.

Art and literature[edit]
Cuttack has been the home to many notable personalities who have contributed a lot towards the culture and history of modern Odisha. It is rightly called the Cultural capital.[citation needed]

Drama and theater culture[edit]
Cuttack had been the centre of art and literature in the past. Annapurna Theatre is considered as the pioneer of Oriya theatre company. The B-Group of the Annapurna theatre, situated in Buxi Bazar is also one of the oldest theatres of Odisha. Kala Vikash Kendra in Cuttack is another institution for dance, drama and music in Odisha. It organizes international theatre olympiads annually where artists from different countries participate along with the local artists. Sarala Sahitya Sansad, Utkal Sahitya Samaj and Marwari Yuva Manch are some other organisations contributing to the rich culture of Odisha.

Libraries, Art Galleries and Auditoriums[edit]
Cuttack has been the seat of various literary activities and many notable writers and poets lived and worked here. There are many old libraries in Cuttack including the first library of the state Kanika Library at Ravenshaw University, Biswanath Pandit Central Library, Odisha Urdu Library, Madhusudan Library, PK Padhihari Pathagara, Bakul Library, Biren Mitra Library etc. CMC Sahid Bhawan has a big art gallery for exhibitions. Town Hall, KVK, Sahid Bhawan, Satabdi Bhawan, Sarala Bhawan etc. are the prominent auditoriums in the city.

 Biju Pattnaik Film and Television Institute of Odisha at Jobra
Odia film industry[edit]
The Odia Film Industry[28] has its base in Cuttack. The Oriya film industry is popularly known as Ollywood, the name is a portmanteau of the words Oriya and Hollywood. In 1974, the Government of Odisha declared film making and construction of cinema theatres as industry in the state,[29] and two years later in 1976, it established the Orissa Film Development Corporation in Cuttack.[30] One of the regional offices for Central Board of Film Certification is situated in Cuttack.

Movie theatres[edit]
The city has several cinemas playing movies in Odia, Hindi and English languages. Historically, Cuttack accounted for almost half of the number of cinema halls in the state but eventually, those numbers declined. Presently, Cuttack hosts five single-screen movie theatres name Grand, Brindaban, Samrat, Nishamani and Jayashree. It also houses two multiplexes namely Inox and Sangam; the former being the state's second four-screen multiplex after its Bhubaneswar branch. Odisha's First Cinema Hall marks its beginning from Cuttack. In 1926 a Mobile Cinema Hall named Chameria Cinema Company showed films. Thereafter Annapurna Theatre came into existence. In 1932 Hallmuk Cinema Hall marked its beginning at Tinkonia Bagicha. Movies like Harischandra and Odia First movie Sita Bibah screen from this cinema hall in 1934. Another cinema hall named Capital Cinema was also built in Tinkonia Bagicha in 1936. Second Odia film Lalita release from this Hall. Similarly, in 1944-45 Pravat Cinema Hall near Baropathar, in 1951 Hind Cinema was built. In 1962 United Talkies Came into existence in Saheed Bhawan. Thereafter Parvati Talkies also built in Kalyanmandap of CUTTACK Municipality. In 1969 Grand Cinema and Suraj Talkies, 1972 Jyoti Cinema which renamed as Laxmi Hall came into existence. 1979 Durga Hall, 1980 Nisamani Hall, Samrat Hall, 1982 Brundaban Hall, Sagar Sangam Hall, Devi Cinema, 1983 Rajtarangini, 1985 Jaysree Talkies Came into existence. Inox Multiplex opened in 2018, as Odisha's second after Bhubaneswar Inox.

Demographics[edit]
See also: List of cities in Odisha
Population[edit]
According to the 2011 census of India,[31] the population of Cuttack City in 2011 was 606,007: 331,246 male and 302,477 female. Its urban / metropolitan population was 658,986 of which 331,246 males and 327,740 are females. There were 48,585 children aged 0–6, 8.02% of total population of Cuttack City: 25,358 boys and 23,227 girls. The gender ratio of Cuttack City was 997 per 1000 males, for children 916 girls per 1000 boys.

Literacy[edit]



Literacy in Cuttack

Literacy

Percent


Male
 
94.12%


Female
 
84.49%


All
 
91.17%




Cuttack has an average literacy rate of 91.17% with male literacy at 97.87% and female literacy at 84.49%. The Cuttack ranks high in literacy rate among Top Cities of India.

Religion[edit]



Religions in Cuttack

Religion

Percent


Hinduism
 
89.65%


Islam
 
8.23%


Christianity
 
1.35%


Others
 
0.65%

Others include Jainism, Sikhism and Buddhism



Around 89.65% of the city's population are Hindus while Muslims account for 8.23% and the rest constitute 2% of the total population.[32] Cuttack has the largest population of Christians in the state.

Languages[edit]
Odia is the primary language used in the city, besides which English and Hindi may be spoken and understood.[citation needed] There are people who also speak Santali, Bengali, Marwari, Telugu, Gujarati, Punjabi, Urdu, etc. English is widely used for commercial purposes. Most of the banners are written in Odia and English .

Civic administration[edit]
Political and municipal administration[edit]
The City of Cuttack is administered by the Cuttack Municipal Corporation. CMC was established as a municipality on 4 June 1876 and was named as a corporation on 15 August 1994. This corporation covers an area of 192.5 km2.[2][33] The CMC is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the Metropolitan City.[34][35]
The Municipal Commissioner is the chief executive officer and head of the executive arm of the Municipal Corporation. All executive powers are vested on the Municipal Commissioner who is an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer appointed by the State Government.
Cuttack City is divided into three constituencies which are represented at the State Legislative Assembly viz. Barabati-Cuttack, Choudwar-Cuttack and Cuttack Sadar. Cuttack-Sadar is represented by Chandra Sarathi Behera (BJD) whereas Barabati-Cuttack is represented by Er.Mohammad Moquim (INC) while Choudwar-Cuttack is represented by Souvic Biswal (BJD).

 Odisha High Court from Ravenshaw Collegiate school
Police and judicial administration[edit]
Bhubaneswar–Cuttack Police Commissionerate, under the control of Commissioner of Police, looks after the law enforcement in Cuttack. Cuttack has 25 Police Stations in the city. The headquarters of the state police are situated in Cuttack. Cuttack is the judicial capital of Odisha as the High Court is situated here. Apart from it many other courts and tribunals have their offices in the city. Cuttack also houses circle jail at Choudwar.

Utilities, NGOs and charitable organisations[edit]
Electricity is supplied by the state-operated Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odisha, or CESU. Fire services are handled by the state agency Odisha Fire Service. Drinking water is sourced from the underground wells and Mahanadi river. Water supply and sewerage are handled by the Public Health Engineering Organisation. State-owned Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited, or BSNL, as well as private enterprises, among them Vodafone, Bharti Airtel, Jio, and Idea Cellular are the leading telephone, cell phone and Internet service providers in the city.

Cuttack has the largest number of NGOs, charitable organisations, orphanages, old age and destitute homes than anywhere else in the state. Famous ones include Matrubhaban, Josoda Sadan, Daya Ashram, Basundhara orphanage, Odisha Children's Orphanage, Leprosy Home, Regional Institute of Mental Health, etc. Traditional cow horn sculpture
Economy[edit]
Cuttack is widely known as the commercial capital of Odisha. It is believed to have the largest GDP among all cities in Odisha due to its large business houses and a wide range of industries ranging from ferrous alloys, steel and logistics to agriculture and traditional industries like textiles and handicrafts. There are many trading houses in the city renowned nationally and internationally. The Paradip Port which is around 85 km from the city facilitates this process.[36]

Traditional Industries[edit]
 Tarakasi (Silver Filigree) Pendant and Ear ringsThe city is one of the largest hub for textiles in eastern India. The city's annual textile trade generates over a billion dollars of revenue. A large textile park is planned, giving a facelift to the erstwhile Orissa Textile Mills in city outskirts. Cuttack is famous for its silver filigree works and only because of these works it is also known as the silver city of India.[37][38] Cuttack is also famous for its handicraft works using cow and mostly Buffaloes horn. Cuttack has only one retail store for horn items named Utkal Gaurab Madhusudhan Horn Work. It was greatly contributed by Late Kalandi Charana Behera. Generally, the horn of dead cattle is used and it is performed by licensed craftsmen only. This peculiar artefact is limited to Cuttack only and anything of such kind is found nowhere else in the world. These fine and unique handicraft works add significantly to the local economy.
Industrial corridor and Special Economic Zone[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are 11 large-scale industries in and around Cuttack mostly in Choudwar and Athagarh and many more in the pipeline. These industries include steel, power, automobile, alloys, fireclay, etc. Indian Metals & Ferro Alloys (IMFA), the country's largest producer of ferrous alloys is in Choudwar, Cuttack. A mega-auto complex is in implementation stages on the city's outskirts. Cuttack occupies a very significant place in the logistics map of the country. The number of medium- and small-scale industries concentrated around Cuttack is by far the largest among the cities in the state. The industrial estates in and around Cuttack numbers around eight. Jagatpur and Khapuria are industrial estates inside the city. A large chunk of these serve as ancillary industries for the big industrial houses in Odisha and other states.

Service sector[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Being the former capital and now the partial capital of the state and a big business hub, many central and state government and corporate offices are in Cuttack. The service sector is quite large. The people of nearby districts are heavily depended on the city for their livelihood, contributing to the service sector and, thus, the floating population. The presence of Central Rice Research Institute (CRRI), the largest rice research institute in Asia, adds to the importance of Cuttack in the agricultural map of the country. The presence of Odisha High Court and the SCB Medical & College, the largest medical institution in the state, further nourishes the service sector. Education is a major industry due to large number of universities, colleges, schools and coaching centres and caters to the neighbouring districts. The proximity to Paradip Port comes as an added advantage. OSL Group, one of the leading stevedore firms of the country is headquartered in Cuttack. Cuttack, being the largest business hub of the state is the nodal point of trade and transport. It also has the largest wholesale commodities market of the state at Malgodown and Chhatra Bazaar catering the whole state.

Media[edit]
 The Samaja Office
Cuttack has a Doordarshan centre which telecasts Odia programs. The Cuttack station of All India Radio started post-independence in 1948 and broadcasts programs in AM as well as FM bandwidth catering the whole state.[39][40] At present Cuttack has six local radio stations broadcasting on FM, including two from AIR. The private FM stations include 91.9 Sarthak FM, BIG 92.7 FM, RED 93.5 FM and Radio Choklate 104 FM.[41]
Among several print media houses located at Cuttack, the Oriya newspapers published here includes The Samaja (founded by Utkala Mani Gopabandhu Das), Prajatantra (founded by Harekrushna Mahatab, former Chief Minister of Odisha and former Governor of Maharashtra),  Sambad, Dharitri and the Matrubhasha to name a few.

Healthcare[edit]
 Sishu Bhawan Main Building
Cuttack is the healthcare hub of Odisha. Millions of people from different parts of Odisha and other states throng to the city with the hope of better medical facilities.[citation needed] Shri Ramachandra Bhanj Medical College (SCBMCH), the largest medical college of the state is located in Cuttack. The Acharya Harihar Regional Cancer Centre (AHRCC), the only one of its kind in Eastern India, carries out high-end research and treatment in cancer. The Regional Spinal Injury Centre (RSIC) is also situated in the S.C.B. Medical College Campus which provides rehabilitation measures to persons with disabilities especially spinal injury. Swami Vivekananda National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research (SVNIRTAR) is the most prestigious institution in the field of rehabilitation located at Olatpur, 30 km from Cuttack.  Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel PG Institute of Paediatrics (SVPPIG), popularly known as Sishu Bhawan is an annex hospital of SCBMCH. It is the largest hospital of its kind in eastern India. Leprosy Home and Hospital near Nuabazar is over 100 years old and is still serving the people.
Major hospitals in and around Cuttack are District Headquarters Hospital (City Hospital), Shanti Memorial Hospital, HCG Panda Cancer Hospital, Ashwini Hospital, Sun Hospital,[42] Sabarmati General Hospital, Dr. Agarwal's Eye Hospital, Heritage Healthcare Hospital, Rotary Eye Hospital and Melvin Jones Lion's Eye Hospital among others.

Education[edit]
Schools and colleges in Cuttack[edit]
Schools in Cuttack are either run by the Cuttack Municipal Corporation or by private trusts and individuals. The Odia medium schools in Cuttack are affiliated to the Board of Secondary Education, Odisha whilst the English medium affiliated to either ICSE or the CBSE. Apart from English and Odia medium schools, certain Hindi, Urdu, Gujarati, Bengali and Telugu medium schools are also present in Cuttack. Ravenshaw Collegiate School, the oldest school of Odisha which proudly boasts many eminent personalities in its alumni including Netaji Subash Chandra Bose, Biju Patnaik, Harekrushna Mahatab, etc. is situated in Cuttack. Some of the other prominent Odia medium schools of the city include Secondary Board High School, Jobra High SchoolJobra High School, Ravenshaw Girls High School, Ranihat High School, Nua Bazar High School, Odisha Police High School, Christ Collegiate School, Kamalakanta Vidayapitha, Peary Mohan Academy, Badambadi New Colony High School, Matrubhaban School & College, CuttackMatrubhaban school & college, Buckley Girls School, CRRI High School.
The city has a number of Saraswati Shishu Mandirs and CBSE schools. The prominent public schools are Sai International Residential School (SIRS), D.A.V. Public School, Sector-6, CDA, L.R.D.A.V Public School, Gandarpur, D.A.V. Public School, Rajabagicha, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Kendriya Vidyalaya No.1, Kendriya Vidyalaya No.2, Mahanadi Vihar, Kendriya Vidyalaya No.3, Kendriya Vidyalaya Arc Charbatia, Stewart School, New Stewart School, Delhi Public School Kalinga, St. Xavier's High School, Sri Sathya Sai School, St. Joseph's Girls High School, S.C.B. Medical Public School, Cambridge School, Joharimall High School, Modern Public School, Queen Mary's School etc. Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose studied at Stewart School briefly before moving to Ravenshaw Collegiate School.
Under the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll for two years in junior college, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. This is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering, and medicine. Most of the colleges in the city are affiliated to the Council of Higher Secondary Education. Some of the prominent colleges include Ravenshaw College, Stewart Science College, Christ College, Choudwar College, Choudwar women's college, Cuttack College, Jatiya Kabi Bira Kishore (J.K.B.K.) College, Netaji City College, Raghunathjew College, Sailabala Women's College, Emarti Devi Women's College, Indira Gandhi Women's College, City Women's College, Sri Aurobindo Institute of Higher Studies & Research, Kishore Nagar College, Kandarpur College. Sailabala Women's college established in 1913 is the oldest women's college in Odisha.

Universities and institutes of higher education and research[edit]
The Twin Cities account for around 100 engineering colleges. Cuttack is home to several technical institutions which include Institute of Management and Information Technology (IMIT), Bhubananda Orissa school of Engineering(BOSE), Institute of Textile Technology (ITT), Dhaneshwar Rath Institute of Engineering & Management Studies (DRIEMS), Image Institute of Technology & Management (IITM), Ajay Binay Institute of Technology (ABIT), Institute of Professional Studies and Research (IPSAR), Jagannath Institute of Engineering and Technology, Barabati Institute of Management Studies etc.
Some of the other institutes include Biju Pattnaik Institute of Film and Television and the Madhusudan Law College. Madhusudan Law college has been declared to be upgraded as a university.[citation needed]
Established in 1869 as Cuttack Normal School, converted to Cuttack Training School in 1875 and later in 1923 as Secondary Training School, later renamed as Radhanath Training School, after the eminent teacher and poet Radhanath Ray, now known as Radhanatha Institute of Advanced Studies in Education (RNIASE) offers various teaching Courses, is located adjacent to the campus wall of Ravenshaw Collegiate School and in front of Swaraj Asrama in Bakharabad is the oldest institute in the State. Also in 1912, Odisha's only Urdu teacher training school was established in Sheikh Bazar Which is now only the Muslim Minority Govt Elementary Teacher Education Institution in Odisha where every year 100 pupil teachers complete their elementary teacher training.[citation needed]

National Law University Odisha (NLUO)[edit]
Cuttack is the home to the National Law University Odisha, one of the 14 NLU's in India, which was established under the National Law University Odisha Act of 2008, the National Law University(NLU Cuttack).[43] It is one of the  institutes for legal education in India funded by the Central as well as the State government. Housed in a sprawling campus the university sees a host of legal luminaries who impart education to the students.[citation needed] Ravenshaw Seven Pillars of Wisdom
Madhusudan Law University (MLU)[edit]
Cuttack houses Odisha's oldest law college, Madhusudan Law College. In 1869 the law course was introduced in the Ravenshaw Collegiate School, thereafter it continued in the Ravenshaw College. That time the Bachelor of Law course was under the University of Calcutta and after the foundation of Utkal University in 1943 the Madhusudan Law College was also established in the same year. This college is named after National Leader and politician Madhusudan Das. With effect from June 2020, Madhusudan Law College has been upgraded to Madhusudan Law University. As per the notification from DHE Odisha, "[a]ll the existing government and private law colleges, except the constituent law colleges of different universities of the state shall be affiliated and cease to be affiliated from their respective universities from that date and direct that the said University shall have jurisdiction, save as aforesaid, over all law colleges of the state."

Ravenshaw University[edit]
Ravenshaw University[44] is one of the oldest institutes of India and the oldest college of the state which was founded by Thomas Edward Ravenshaw in 1868 and was granted University status on 15 November 2006. Ravenshaw University came into existence on 15 November 2006. It was an up-gradation of Ravenshaw College established in 1868, one of the oldest and largest colleges in India which subsequently became an autonomous college with CPE status by UGC and 'A' grade by NAAC.[citation needed]

Sri Sri University[edit]
 Sri Sri University at Naraj Sri Sri University established by Sri Sri Ravi Shankar and Art of Living is situated at the far end of the city in Naraj.[45] It came into operation in the year 2012.
National Rice Research Institute (NRRI)[edit]
Asia's largest rice research institute, the Central Rice Research Institute (CRRI)[46] is situated in Cuttack. In 1945, the Government of India decided to establish a central Institute for rice research. As a result, the Central Rice Research Institute (CRRI) was set up on 23 April 1946 at Bidhyadharpur, Cuttack, Odisha with an experimental farmland of 60 hectares provided by Government of Orissa. The CRRI is one of the Institutes of the ICAR under the Division of Crop Sciences. The institute has two research stations- Central Rainfed Upland Rice Research Station (CRURRS), Hazaribagh, in Jharkhand, and the Regional Rainfed Lowland Rice Research Station (RRLRRS), Gerua, in Assam. These research stations were established to tackle the problems of rainfed uplands, and flood-prone rainfed lowlands, respectively. Two Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) also function under the CRRI and guided by the DDG (Agril. Extension). These KVKs are located at Santhapur, Cuttack and Jainagar, Koderma.

Srirama Chandra Bhanja Medical College and Hospital (SCBMCH)[edit]
Shri Ramachandra Bhanj Medical College (SCB), the largest medical college of the state is located in Cuttack. The S.C.B. Medical College also has a dental wing which offers bachelor's degree in dental sciences. Acharya Harihar Regional Cancer Centre (AHRCC), the only one of its kind in Eastern India, carries out high-end research and treatment in cancer. The Regional Spinal Injury Centre (RSIC) is also situated in the S.C.B. Medical College Campus. RSIC is an autonomous organisation under the administrative and financial control of Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government of Odisha and is headed by the director of the RSIC which provides rehabilitation measures to persons with disabilities especially spinal injury.

Swami Vivekananda National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research (SVNIRTAR)[edit]
Svnitar is an institute in the field of rehabilitation. Swami Vivekanand National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research (SVNIRTAR) is an Autonomous body under Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (DIVYANGJAN), Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Govt. of India. It provides total medical rehabilitation for the Persons with Locomotor Disabilities. It also conducts three bachelor's degree courses in Physiotherapy, Occupational Therapy, Prosthetics and Orthotics, three Postgraduate courses of Physiotherapy, Occupational Therapy and Prosthetics and Orthotics affiliated to Utkal University, Bhubaneswar. It also has an accreditation for DNB in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation of National Board of Examination (NBE), New Delhi.[47]

Sardar Vallabhbahai Patel Post Graduate Institute of Paediatrics (SVPPGIP)[edit]
SVPPGIP also known as Shishu Bhawan is the largest Paediatrics hospital in eastern India. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Post Graduate Institute of Paediatrics (Sishubhawan), Cuttack, Orissa is based on manifold historic backgrounds situated on the bank of river Kathjori amidst the lush greenery. This palatial building was the center of administration during Mugul, Maratha and British regime from 1568 A.D. till independence. After independence this building was known as "Rajbhawan" where Governor of Orissa used to stay.[48]

Biju Pattnaik Film and Television Institute of Odisha (BPFTIO)[edit]
The government of Odisha has established an autonomous Institute in the name and style of Biju Pattnaik Film & Television Institute of Orissa (BPFTIO) under World Bank assisted scheme to meet the emerging demand of well trained technical manpower in the field of television network and film production activities. Situated on the bank of river Mahanadi, BPFTIO occupies an independent space in the sprawling campus of Bhubanananda Orissa School of Engineering (BOSE), Cuttack the oldest Engineering School of the State. Funded by Government of Odisha, Department of Employment and Technical Education & Training, the institute offers diploma courses in 3 disciplines such as Cinematography, Sound & TV. Engineering and Film & Video Editing.[49]

Transport[edit]
Show zoomed outShow zoomed midShow zoomed in
Air[edit]
Cuttack has an Air Base named Charbatia Air Base for the exclusive use for light exercises and on and off training purposes of the Indian Air Force. The nearest commercial airport is the Biju Patnaik International Airport at Bhubaneswar, about 28 km away but the establishment of an Airport in Cuttack, at Choudwar or Naraj to serve such a large population in and around the city is needed.

 Badambadi Bus Stand
Road[edit]
On 28 April 2010, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways officially published a new numbering system for the National highway network in the Gazette of the Government of India. As per the new numbering National Highway 16 (former National Highway 5) runs from North to South of the city. As a part of the Golden Quadrilateral project, this highway runs from Chennai to Kolkata. National Highway 55 (former National Highway 42) connects Cuttack with Sambalpur. Also Asian Highway 45 passes through the city. Feeder State Highways connect Cuttack to Jajpur, Paradeep, Talcher, Angul, Kendrapara and nearby towns in Cuttack district. Intra city transport is primarily through Auto rickshaws. Nowadays DTS city buses ply in the city to join different places in the city and the state capital. Cuttack is a major junction connecting all the major parts of the state. The bus terminus at Cuttack is located at Badambadi, and is one of the largest bus terminus in India, and thousands of private and government buses ply to hundreds of destinations every day. A new Inter-state bus terminus (ISBT) at Balikuda is under construction to relieve pressure off the Badambadi Bus Terminus. Cuttack is now more strongly connected to Bhubaneswar and Dhenkanal due to the addition of two new bridges namely Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Setu on Kathjodi and Utkal Gourab Madhusudan Setu on Mahanadi. The former is the longest road bridge in Odisha.

Rail[edit]
 Cuttack Junction Railway Station
Cuttack Junction is one of the stations on the Howrah-Chennai main line of the East Coast Railway and falls under the Khurda Road division. A branch line to Paradeep starts from Cuttack. It is connected to all parts of India through trains run by the Indian Railways. The Cuttack Railway station is selected to be developed as a multi-functional railway station with food courts shopping plaza, theatres to be developed . Other railway stations in the city are Barang Junction railway station, Balikuda, Matagajpur, Kandarpur, Katha Jori, Kendrapara Road, Kapilas Road, Manguli, Nergundi and Naraj. The Mahanadi Rail bridge is the 5th longest rail bridge in India.

Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS)[edit]
The Government of Odisha has proposed a rapid transit system for the cities of Cuttack and Bhuabneswar. On 23 August 2014, Government of Odisha's Housing and Urban Development Department signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Balaji Railroad Systems Ltd (BARSYL) for preparation of a detailed project report (DPR) for mass rapid transit system (MRTS) between Cuttack and Bhubaneswar. The Balaji Railroad Systems Ltd (BARSYL) would get Rs 25 million for preparation of DPR for approximately 30 km within a period of ten months. The government officials said it would be a testing for them to evict encroachments for expansion of roads in the twin cities.[50]
The Government of Odisha is working on introduction of Monorail service in Cuttack. The Housing and Urban Development Department has taken up the issue for exploring Monorail system in Cuttack to make it the first city in the state to have Monorail service. A study on the viability of launching the monorail over an eight to 10 km stretch in the city is expected to be carried out soon. The Engineering Projects (India) Ltd would conduct a comprehensive survey of the city's capacity to host the system as well as the traffic and congestion problems and submit a proposal. The initially proposed route of circular Ring Road has been ruled out as it was not considered feasible on traffic considerations. While Badambadi-Madhupatana Link Road stretch is the most congested with traffic density crossing 300 per minute, thoroughfares like Choudhury Bazar College Square, Mangalabag, Buxi Bazaar, Chandni Chowk, CDA Square see peak flow of over 100 vehicles per minute are more likely to be taken into consideration.[51][52]

Sports[edit]
Cuttack is the sports hub of Odisha. It is the host to the famous Barabati Stadium as well as many other stadium and grounds. Cuttack has a branch of Sports Authority of India (SAI) training centres, which was established on 26 March 1987 under Sports Hostel Scheme in the Barabati Sports Complex. The authority is responsible for training in Athletics, Basketball, Football, Volleyball, and Gymnastics.

 Sachin Tendulkar Indoor Hall
Barabati Sports Complex[edit]
Cuttack is the home to the Barabati Sports Complex. The Barabati Stadium is an important venue for international cricket and football matches.[53][54] The Barabati Sports Complex hosts the head offices of most of the sports bodies of the state. Apart from cricket and football, the sports complex also has facilities for Lawn Tennis, Basketball, Volleyball, Swimming. The sports complex also houses an indoor hall christened as Sachin Tendulkar Indoor Hall, dedicated to legendary cricketer Sachin Tendulkar. The construction of the indoor hall was a joint venture of the Odisha Cricket Association and the Board of Control for Cricket in India which was formally inaugurated on the auspicious occasion of Utkal Divas. The centrally air-conditioned 185 feet long, 65 feet wide and 44 feet high four-storied complex has been built primarily to provide practise facility to cricketers during off season. The complex is also used to stage competitions in different indoor sports including basketball, volleyball, badminton, table tennis, fencing, judo, weight-lifting and wrestling. Jawaharlal Nehru Indoor Stadium
Jawaharlal Nehru Indoor Stadium[edit]
East India's second and Odisha's only indoor arena, Jawaharlal Nehru Indoor Stadium is situated in Cuttack. The indoor arena is primarily used for Gymnastics and Martial Arts. It has hosted many international and national sporting events in the past. It is also used to host musical concerts and award shows. It hosted the 21st edition of the Commonwealth Table Tennis Championships from 17 to 21 July 2019. It will host the BWF World Tour tournament Odisha Open from 2022 Onwards.

Satyabrata Stadium[edit]
This is situated inside the fort area and is primarily used for athletics and soccer. It has a concrete track used for athletics and synthetic basketball courts. It is used by the locals for jogging and morning exercises too.

Jagatpur Water Sports Complex[edit]
Cuttack is also the only hub in Odisha for Water Sports. The Rowing & Sculling Association of Odisha is situated in Cuttack at Jagatpur. The water sports events are facilitated in the River Birupa.
The DRIEMS Stadium at Tangi has also hosted international cricket matches and is a regular venue for Ranji Trophy matches.  Cuttack also has some very good sporting grounds like Nimpur Grounds, Bidanasi Grounds, Sunshine Grounds, Ravenshaw Grounds, SCB Medical Grounds, BOSE Grounds which are the venues for annual state cricket and football championships and some of which are often used as additional venues for Ranji Trophy and Santosh Trophy matches.
Cuttack along with Mumbai has hosted the 2013 Women's Cricket World Cup. Apart from it, Cuttack has also hosted matches in 1987 Cricket World Cup and 1996 Cricket World Cup. The 18th and 24th National Games were held in Cuttack in 1958 and 1970 respectively.

Historical places of interest[edit]
 Barabati Fort ruins of nine-storied palace complex
Barabati Fort and Cantonment[edit]
 Barabati Fort arched gate over the moat is a symbol of CuttackThe Barabati Fort is a 10th-century castle built by the Somavamshi dynasty lineage ruler Maharaja Markata Keshari.[55] The ruins of the fort still remain with its moat, gate and the earthen mound of the nine-storied palace, which evokes the memories of past days. The ruins of the fort still remain on the right bank of the Mahanadi, in the western part of the city with its moat, gate and the earthen mound of the nine-storied palace, which evokes the memories of past days.
Chudangagarh Fort[edit]
Chudangagarh otherwise called Sarangagarh is located near the Barang Junction railway station and is 8 km. south-west of Cuttack city on a fair-weather road. Like Barabati Fort this fort also played a significant role in the medieval history of Orissa. Chodagandadeva of Ganga dynasty selected this site and built the fort for effective safeguard of his vast empire. Remains of fort walls, stepped wells, dilapidated temples, tanks with stone revetments, granary house, watch towers and dressed stones are abundantly noticed within the fortified area. A ruined palace containing sixteen rooms called Solapura Uasa is located inside the fort. The granary of the fort is indicated at a place called Chaula Ghara Banks. Chudangagarh is now a protected monument of the Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi.

Netaji Birthplace Museum[edit]
Cuttack takes pride in being the birthplace of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose, the prominent Indian freedom-fighter and founder of Azad Hind Fauj. The birthplace of Netaji is situated in Oriya Bazar known as Janakinath Bhawan, behind Big Bazaar. The place has now been converted into a museum named Netaji Birth Place Museum. The museum showcases the original letters written by Netaji along with other important materials used by Netaji.

Madhusudan Sangrahalaya[edit]
Cuttack is the birthplace of Utkala Gaurav Madhusudan Das. His former residence and workplace Madhusmruti was converted to Sailabala Women's College in 1952. A small hall within the college premises has been preserved as Madhusudan Sangrahalaya, that contains works and memoirs of the great architect of Odisha.

 Anand Bhawan Museum and Learning Centre
Anand Bhavan Museum and Learning Centre[edit]
Anand Bhavan, the ancestral house of Biju Patnaik at Tulsipur, was converted into a memorial museum in 2016. Chief Minister of Odisha Naveen Patnaik's grandfather Laxmi Narayan Patnaik had built Anand Bhavan. Biju Babu was born there on 5 March 1916. Biju Babu's iconic Dakota DC-3 aircraft used to rescue Indonesian prime minister Sultan Sjahrir is scheduled to be showcased near his ancestral home.

Odisha State Maritime Museum[edit]
 Odisha State Maritime Museum
The Odisha State Maritime Museum was inaugurated by the Odisha chief minister Shri Naveen Pattnaik on 1 April 2013.[56] It has been set up at the erstwhile Jobra workshop on the banks of river Mahanadi near Jobra. It has 10 number of galleries and an aquarium. In 1882 the East India Irrigation Company build an anicut (Jobra Anicut) (6349 ft. long) across the river Mahanadi near jobra and the Jobra Khunti (Pillar) to serve as a lighthouse to boats and cargo vessels passing through the river and the Taladanda canal.

Old Jail Complex and the Freedom Fighter's Memorial[edit]
This location was inaugurated by Hon. Chief Minister of Odisha Mr. Naveen Patnaik on 23 January 2010, on the occasion of Netaji Jayanti. It is situated at the Old Jail complex. The old jail complex of Cuttack near Ganga Mandir tank and Dargha Bazar was a colonia-period jail cellular jail where many notable freedom fighters were imprisoned during the Swaraj movement.[citation needed]

Swaraj Ashram[edit]
The Swaraj Ashram at Telengabazar is synonymous with Mahatma Gandhi's relationship with Odisha, Cuttack in particular. The double-storey Ashram, located opposite the banks of the Kathajodi River. was in the thick of the Non Cooperation Movement in the 1920s. This is where Gandhi stayed during his visits to Odisha. The ashram that spreads over an area of 1,100 square feet (100 m2) has been converted into a protected monument by the Government of Odisha. There are around 200 photographs in the ashram that captured Gandhi's visit to Odisha beginning with the one in 1921, the first of his seven trips to Odisha's 69 sites till 1946. Historians say that Cuttack was the seat of the Freedom Movement in Odisha and the Swaraj Ashram played a pivotal role in paving the way for Swaraj Movement

Maratha barracks[edit]
The Marhatta barracks are medieval era structures in Chauliaganj, presently used as headquarters of the 6th battalion of the Odisha State Armed police Force (OSAPF), were used as armoury both during the Marhatta and British rule. These iconic long barracks are one of the oldest surviving buildings of Odisha and are widely perceived as original remaining structures and a unique example of the synthesis of Maratha and Odishan architecture.[57] Rajaram Pandit started the work in 1775 and it was completed by Sadasiva Rao in 1795.[citation needed] Spread across a vast patch of forest land on the outskirts of the city, the place was infested by tigers, panthers, snakes and other wildlife. The forest was cleared except for some ancient trees, which are still standing tall. The domed structures were solidly built with local materials. Kiln baked bricks and lime mortar was used. There were big wells in the compound and underground cells. Separate stables for their horses and elephants, magazines for storing gunpowder, living quarters etc. were made. The barracks housed the artillery, cavalry and infantry forces. The Marathas had as many as 2,000 soldiers in the barracks.[citation needed] There was a thick wall around with watchtowers, none of which now exist.

Salt House[edit]
Britishers had built the Salt House in 1847–48 and the Collectorate was functioned from this house till new building was built. River 'Kathajodi' was the main transit source for the commercial commodities. The length of the buildings is 190' with 66 pillars. Presently the building is used as Courts of Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrates. The building had an aristocratic look with 3 guns standing as guards. Unfortunately, the architecture of the building has been completely disfigured with many brickworks and structures.

Lal Bagh Palace[edit]
Situated on the bank of the Kathjodi, the Lal Bagh Palace at Cuttack has a long and colourful history. This building witnessed the rise and fall of several rulers who controlled the fortune of Odisha. It was constructed by the Mughal Subedar stationed at Cuttack. Subsequently, the property passed into the hands of the Marathas. Over the years the premises have undergone several alterations and modifications. William Bruton visited Cuttack in 1633, when the Lal Bagh Palace was under construction. In 1741, Saulat Jung, the Naib Nazim, fixed his residence in the palace. The building was occupied by the Naib Nazims till 1751 and by the representatives of the Bhonslas of Nagpur from 1751 to 1803. Lal Bagh came into the possession of the British in 1803 when Colonel Harcourt's men defeated the Maratha soldiers. The Lal Bagh Palace was apparently leased out but again came into the possession of Government, who sold it in January 1862, and the purchaser sold the estate along with the building to the East India Irrigation Company. In 1863, the building came into the possession of the Government when they took over the irrigation works from the company. Since 1868 the building was occupied by Commissioners and sometimes by Collectors. In 1896, Shri R.C. Dutt, the then Commissioner, who was also a well-known historian, lived in this building. In a letter to his daughter, he describes the building as "the best-situated Commissioner's house." The building which was still under the Irrigation Branch was transferred to the Buildings and Roads Branch of the Government in 1914. In 1941, Shri K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo, Maharaja of Parlakimedi and Premier of Orissa, fixed his residence at the Lal Bagh palace for a time. On 18 July 1942, the Lal Bagh Palace became the new Government House. Sir Hawthorne Lewis was the first Governor to live in the Lal Bagh Palace. This historic building, which stood witness to countless political and social upheavals during Mughal, Maratha and British rule in Odisha, became the center of administration. The Lal Bagh Palace continued to serve as the residence of the Governor till 1960. During the tenure of Shri Sukthankar in 1960, the Raj Bhavan was shifted from Cuttack to Bhubaneswar. Shri Sukthankar generously donated the building to the Indian Red Cross Society to utilize it as a children's hospital. The Government of Orissa [now, Odisha] took over this hospital in 1966 and made it an independent institute for post-graduate training and research. At present, the institute is known as Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Post Graduate Institute of Pediatrics, and is popularly known as Shishu Bhavan.[58]

Kanika Rajbati[edit]
It is a palace built by Raja Bahadur Rajendra Narayan Bhanjdeo in Cuttack. Once a high-profile area and favourite homestay of Rajkanika rajas as well as British era guest house, this historic structure now lies in a dilapidated state. Gorakabar Anglican Cemetery
Gora Kabar Cemetery[edit]
The Gora Kabar was set up in an area of five acres by the banks of the Mahanadi on the outskirts of the city by the East India Company in 1822. The presence of the English officials and their families had become significant after the occupation of Cuttack in 1803. The site already had graves of a few Englishmen before it was walled in and designated as a graveyard. Initially it was a cemetery for all Christians, but later on it was used only by the Baptists.

Shree Gopal Krishna Goshala[edit]
The antiquity of this old complex is not exactly known. Old timers of Cuttack call it the Goshala, but it was originally a Dharamshala for the pilgrims of the old Jagannath Sadak. Just 100 metres from the Nayabazar Chhak, on the far end of the city, it lay right by the side of the old road. This stretch of the Jagannath Sadak, from the Mahanadi till the Kathjori Ghat was once a 100 feet wide road. During the monsoons, when the Mahanadi was often in spate, pilgrims often had to camp for days to make the crossing; the Dharamshala was built well away from the flood plain, right between the two rivers. The place was originally set up as a Dharamshala by one Seth Jagannath Halan of Calcutta. It was a huge complex with rooms and halls for the pilgrims. There was a big tank and wells dug inside the complex and a large pond, which still exists. It was the largest Dharamshala of the old road and could house a thousand pilgrims. There was a separate accommodation block for the Sadhus and Mahants who traveled on the old road. Many of the pilgrims camped under the huge trees. In 1905, two benevolent Marwaris of Salkia in Howrah District, Seth Bishen Dayal and Seth Hari Dayal, took over the abandoned Dharamshala and transformed it into a Goshala. There is a marble plaque which says that the Victoria Gorakhini Sabha opened the Goshala in the place in 1905. They made some alterations and repairs to the old building and made it into a charitable institution rendering service for old and infirm cattle.

 Lalitgiri as a part of Pushpagiri Mahavihara
Lalitgiri[edit]
Lalitgiri also known as Naltigiri is a major Buddhist Mahavihara complex in the Indian state of Odisha comprising major stupas, 'esoteric' Buddha images, and monasteries (viharas), one of the oldest sites in the region. Together with the Ratnagiri and Udayagiri sites, Lalitgiri is part of Puspagiri University located on top of hills of the same names. The three complexes are known as the "Diamond Triangle". Significant finds at this complex include Buddha's relics. Tantric Buddhism was practiced at this site.

Olasuni Hill[edit]
Olasuni hill stands on the border of Cuttack and Jajpur district, adjacent to the Daitari- Paradip Express Highway. The saint Arakhita Das after travelling widely, finally chose Olasuni hill as his Sadhana Pitha. There he meditated in a cave for a long period and finally attained salvation. The hill is dotted with temples, among which the temple of Goddess Olasuni, the presiding deity and the tomb of Saint Arakhit Das are famous. The sleepy Olasuni hill wakes up to the delight of the devotees, on Magha Ekadasi every year, who throng the place in large numbers to witness the nine-day Gumpha Yatra. The Yatra commemorates the death anniversary or Shradha Mahostav of the saint Arakhita Das who lived here 200 years ago.
Apart from these Odisha High Court Museum, Odisha Government Press Museum, Odisha Police Museum, Mahanadi River Boating Jetty, Jobra Lovers Point or Suicide Point, etc. are some newest attractions.

Parks and gardens[edit]
Ocean World water park[edit]
The city has the state's only water park named Ocean World. Due to the strategic location of the water park being situated on the midway of Cuttack and Bhubaneswar, it is a popular outing location for the people of both cities.

CMC Deer park[edit]
A deer park is situated beside the Mahanadi Ring Road at Madhusudan Nagar, overseeing the Mahanadi River. The park has about 200 deer. The Park is maintained by the CMC.

Recreational parks[edit]
The city is filled with numerous social parks. Biju Pattnaik park, Birenmitra Park, Gouri Shankar park, Kathajodi river view park, Khannagar park, Jobra park Jayprakash Narayan park are some of the prominent existing parks.

Nandankanan Zoological Park and Botanical Gardens[edit]
Nandankanan is a 400-hectare (990-acre) zoo and botanical garden near Baranga between Cuttack and Bhubaneswar. Established in 1960, it was opened to the public in 1979 and became the first zoo in India to join World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) in 2009. It also contains a botanical garden and part of it has been declared a sanctuary. Nandankanan, literally meaning The Garden of Heaven, is located in the environs of the Chandaka forest, and includes the 134-acre (54 ha) Kanjia lake.

Chandaka Elephant Sanctuary[edit]
Chandka Elephant Sanctuary is a wildlife reserve located in the northwestern fringe of Bhubaneswar in the Indian state of Odisha. Nestled on Khurdha uplands of the Eastern Ghats biotic region, Chandaka forest is spread over 175.79 square kilometres (67.87 sq mi) of rolling table land and small sprawling hillocks of Khurdha and Cuttack Districts. It was designated as an elephant reserve in December 1982.

Naraj Peacock Valley[edit]
Situated at Talapada village a few minutes drive from Naraj bridge and hardly 15 km away from Cuttack is a forest famous for herds of peacocks. 16yrs back when super-cyclone plunked Odisha with its formidable appearance, 3 peacocks from Chandaka reserved forest popped up to this area, where a man named Panu Behera, serving as a forest range caretaker for the cashew nut forest took responsibility to feed them. Since then it has been more than one and half decade now and the flock has been raised to 48. Without any Govt support, Behera has pledged to take care all of these birds till his death thereby earning the name "Peacock man". A few local youngsters took over the charges of present-day peacock herd of 150 male and female.

Mahanadi River Boating[edit]
Jetty has been constructed on Mahanadi near Jobra to facilitate tourists for river cruise ride to Dhabaleshwar or motor boating on Mahanadi. NCC has an exclusive jetty for naval cadet training.

Lakes and reservoirs[edit]
 
 Anshupa Lake
Deojhar WaterFalls, Narasinghpur, Cuttack[edit]
Considered as the one & only waterfall in the entire district this waterfall is around 100 km from Cuttack's main city & can be reached Via Athagada & Badamba.[citation needed]

Anshupa Lake[edit]
Anshupa lake is a 141-hectare horseshoe-shaped fresh water lake on the left bank of the Mahanadi river. It is 40 km from the city and acts as a shelter for the migratory birds in the wintry weather season. This small lake holds a prominent position in the tourist map of Odisha for its natural environment and proximity to both Cuttack and Bhubaneswar. Some bamboo cottages are made on the top of Saranda hill for tourist refreshments. Boating facilities are available.

Jobra Barrage[edit]
Jobra Barrage or Jobra Anikut as widely called is a major source of water for the Mahanadi delta region. Taladanda canal, a major irrigation and flood canal in coastal area starts from here. IOCL's Paradip Refinery has its water intake point from this barrage.

Naraj and Mundali Reservoirs[edit]
Situated at the bifurcation point of Mahanadi and Kathajodi rivers, it marks the westernmost tip of Cuttack city. It is a major irrigation dam on Kathajodi river that ensures the water level in Mahanadi river and thereby preventing flood situations in Cuttack. Near to the Naraj Barrage is the Mundali barrage that is the starting point of Puri Canal. Naraj is a major railway station apart from Cuttack railway station. The area surrounding Naraj has many industries.

Stone revetment on Mahanadi[edit]
Idea of Embankment and fund contribution given by Cuttack Raksaka Baimundi to Maharaja Markata Keshari to save Cuttack from Flood. The King then constructed the Historic Embankment and named as Baimundi Embankment.

Notable people[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The following notable people were born in, or have spent a major part of their life in, Cuttack.


Afzal-ul Amin
Susmita Bagchi
Bhikari Bal
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose
Ramadevi Choudhury
Bibhusita Das
Madhusudan Das
Mihir Das
Sailabala Das
Shiv Sunder Das
Bijaya Jena
Binod Kanungo
Krushna Chandra Kar
Giridharilal Kedia
Annapurna Maharana
Harekrushna Mahatab
Sayeed Mohammed
Mohammad Mohsin
Sabyasachi Mishra
Biren Mitra
Akshaya Mohanty
Anubhav Mohanty
Artaballabha Mohanty
Pradip Kumar Mohanty
Debashish Mohanty
Kumkum Mohanty
Sona Mohapatra
Baishnaba Pani
Biswambhar Parida
Biju Patnaik
Hara Patnaik
Naveen Patnaik
Gopala Chandra Praharaj
Radhanath Rath
Koovarji Karsan Rathor
Rabi Ray
Kabir Suman
Nandini Satpathy
Ratikant Satpathy
Mayadhar Swain
Samuel Tickell
See also[edit]

India portal
Cuttack (Lok Sabha constituency)
Cuttack Development Authority
References[edit]


^ "Exploring Cuttack―Odisha's Silver City". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2018. Alt URL

^ a b "Cuttack Municipal Corporation". {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help)

^ "Cities having population 1 lakh and above" (PDF). Census of India, Government of India. Retrieved 2 November 2011.

^ "odisha high court location map". Odisha high court road map. Odisha Government. Retrieved 8 August 2014.[permanent dead link]

^ "Tier I and Tier II Cities map". Tier II Cities map. maps of India. Retrieved 24 August 2014.

^ "Tier II and Tier III Cities". Tier II Cities. Business Today. 12 October 2013. Retrieved 24 August 2014.

^ "Growth of Tier II and Tier III Cities". Tier II Cities growth. NBM Media. Archived from the original on 15 July 2013. Retrieved 24 August 2014.

^ "Geographical Details of CMC". Geography. cuttack Municipal Corporation. Retrieved 24 August 2014.

^ "Welcome to Cuttack Municipal Corporation". Overview on CMC. cuttack Municipal Corporation. Retrieved 24 April 2018.

^ "Major Agglomerations of the World". City Population. City Population, Germany. Retrieved 24 April 2018.

^ a b Bhoi, Debendra Nath; Bakshi, Priyadarshini. "Historical Importance of Cuttack Town" (PDF). Orissa Historical Research Journal. 47 (2): 132–136. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2013.

^ "Description of the Ward no.1". Cuttack Municipal Corporation.

^ Stirling, Andrew (1822). An account, geographical, statistical and historical of Orissa proper, or Cuttack. [Calcutta].

^ a b Mohanty, Pramod Kumar (2007). "Cuttack : Carrying the Heritage of Orissa" (PDF). Orissa Review. 63 (1): 57–61. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2014.

^ Reddy, Krishna (2005). General Studies History 4 UPSC. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. B-32. ISBN 978-0-07-060447-6.

^ Das, G. S. (1955). "History of Cuttack". Orissa Historical Research Journal. 3: 197–214.

^ Mohanty, Arun K. (2000). "Cuttack: City of the Fort". Orissa Review. 2000 (7 (September)): 36–40.

^ Cuttack Approved – N at GEOnet Names Server, United States National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency

^ Swain, S.;  et al. (2017). "A Multiple Linear Regression Model for Precipitation Forecasting over Cuttack District, Odisha, India". 2017 2nd International Conference for Convergence in Technology (I2CT): 355–357. doi:10.1109/I2CT.2017.8226150. ISBN 978-1-5090-4307-1. S2CID 11416484.

^ "History of Cyclone". Odisha State Disaster Management Authories. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ a b "Hazard profiles of Indian districts" (PDF). National Capacity Building Project in Disaster Management. UNDP. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2006. Retrieved 23 August 2006.

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (1 November 1999). "Cyclone kills hundreds in India". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 December 2012.

^ 
"Station: Cuttack Climatological Table 1981–2010" (PDF). Climatological Normals 1981–2010. India Meteorological Department. January 2015. pp. 215–216. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2021.

^ 
"Extremes of Temperature & Rainfall for Indian Stations (Up to 2012)" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. December 2016. p. M162. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2021.

^ 
"Cuttack(42970)". India Meterological Department. Retrieved 13 August 2022.

^ Uday Dokras (October 2020), Kalinga Maritime history, Indo Nordic Author's Collective, retrieved 9 February 2021

^ "Bali Jatra". Online Webpage Bali Jatra. Directorate of Culture, Cuttack. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Orissacinema.com". Orissacinema.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Position of Oriya Film Industry". Directorate of Film Festivals.

^ Nanda, Jayanta K. (2001). Industrial Development. Sarup & Sons. p. 146. ISBN 978-8176252539.

^ "Top Cities of India, Census of 2011". Online Webpage of Census of India. Registrar General, Government of India. Retrieved 4 August 2014.

^ "India (Religion), Census of 2001". Online Webpage of Census of India. Registrar General, Government of India. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010. Retrieved 24 June 2011.

^ "Overview on CMC". Cuttack Municipal Corporation.

^ "BJD Forms CMC Council, Anita Behera Elected as New Mayor". The New Indian Express. 14 February 2014. Archived from the original on 8 March 2014.

^ "Anita Behera elected CMC mayor". The Pioneer. 14 February 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2014.

^ "Paradip Port Limited". Archived from the original on 24 February 2018. Retrieved 23 August 2014.

^ "Precious Emotions Captured in Silver: The Silver Filigree Work of Cuttack". Orissa Review. 2002 (November): 5.

^ Mohanty, Rabindra K. "Socio-economic Conditions of Silver Filigree Artisans: A Pilot Study in the Silver City". Orissa Review. 1993 (August): 31–41.

^ "History". All India Radio, Cuttack. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014.

^ "Cuttack Radio station". All India Radio. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2012.

^ "List of operational private FM channels in India" (PDF). Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012.

^ Sun Hospital

^ "National Law University, Orissa ← NLUO". Nluo.ac.in. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Welcome to Ravenshaw University". Ravenshawuniversity.ac.in. 13 September 2013. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Enjoy situations with college paper generating?". Archived from the original on 26 April 2015. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ "Central Rice Research Institute (ICAR) (homepage)". Central Rice Research Institute. Retrieved 26 July 2014.

^ "SVNIRTAR". www.svnirtar.nic.in. Retrieved 27 May 2018.

^ "Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Post Graduate Institute of Paediatrics". www.svppgip.org. Retrieved 27 May 2018.

^ ":: Biju Patnaik Film & Television Institute of Orissa ::". www.bpftio.org.in. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2018.

^ "Odisha ready to go for MRTS for faster travel between twin cities". OdishaSunTimes.com. 23 August 2014. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ "Monorail system in Cuttack on cards". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ "Odisha plans Monorail transit system for Cuttack and Bhubaneswar". timesofindia-economictimes. Retrieved 6 May 2015.

^ "Barbati Stadium". India9.com. 7 June 2005. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Barabati Stadium | India | Cricket Grounds | ESPN Cricinfo". Cricinfo.com. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Barabati Fort". The Times of India.

^ dawn, richard1. "Odisha Maritime Museum". www.odishastatemaritimemuseum.org. Retrieved 21 April 2016.

^ "Preserve the Cuttack Maratha barracks for posterity, say researchers | Odisha Television Limited". 31 March 2017. Retrieved 6 February 2018.

^ "Rajbhavan Odisha : History". www.rajbhavanodisha.gov.in. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 29 May 2018.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cuttack.

Cuttack Municipal Corporation
Cuttack Development Authority (CDA)
Official website of Cuttack district
 Cuttack travel guide from Wikivoyage
vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal
vteCuttack districtConstituencies
Athagad
Banki
Barabati-Cuttack
Baramba
Choudwar-Cuttack
Cuttack Sadar
Niali
Mahanga
Salepur
Towns and villages
Adheigundi
Athagad
Banki
Belagachhia
Bherasalepur
Charibatia
Choudwar
Cuttack
Dadhapatna
Jhajia
Kadampara
Kusupur
Mahanga
Nageshpur
Nuapatna
Salepur
Sarobarpur
Other districts
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Bhadrak
Boudh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gajapati
Ganjam
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Koraput
Malkangiri
Mayurbhanj
Nabarangpur
Nayagarh
Nuapada
Puri
Rayagada
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh

vteIndustrial hubs in Odisha
Angul
Balasore
Barbil
Bhubaneswar
Brajarajnagar
Chandikhole
Choudwar
Cuttack
Damanjodi
Hirakud
Jharsuguda
Joda
Kalinganagar
Kalunga
Kansbahal
Paradeep
Rajgangpur
Rayagada
Rourkela
Sunabeda
Talcher

vteMunicipalities of OdishaMunicipalCorporations
Bhubaneswar
Cuttack
Brahmapur
Sambalpur
Rourkela
Municipalities
Anandapur
Angul
Barbil
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Biramitrapur
Brajarajnagar
Byasanagar
Choudwar
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gunupur
Hinjilicut
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Jatani
Jeypore
Jharsuguda
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Nabarangpur
Nuapada
Paradip
Paralakhemundi
Phulbani
Puri
Rajgangpur
Rayagada
Sonepur
Sundergarh
Talcher
Basudebpur
Jaleswar
Koraput
Malkangiri
Pattamundai
Rairangpur
Soro
Sunabeda
Titlagarh
Umerkote
NAC
Asika
Athagad
Attabira
Balimela
Balugaon
Bamra
Banapur
Banki
Barapali
Baudhgarh
Bellaguntha
Belpahar
Bhanjanagar
Binika
Bhuban
Buguda
Burla
Chandabali
Chhatrapur
Chikiti
Digapahandi
Ganjam
Gop
Gopalpur
Gudari
Hirakud
Junagarh
Kamakshyanagar
Kantabanji
Karanjia
Kashinagara
Kabisuryanagar
Kesinga
Khalikote
Khandapada
Khariar
Khariar Road
Kodala
Konark
Kotpad
Kuchinda
Nayagarh
Nilagiri
Nimapada
Nuapada
Padmapur
Patnagarh
Pipili
Polasara
Purusottampur
Redhakhol
Rambha
Surada
Tarbha

Authority control International
VIAF
2
WorldCat
2
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cuttack&oldid=1153006997"
Categories: CuttackCities and towns in Cuttack district989 establishmentsFormer capital cities in India10th-century establishments in IndiaHidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse dmy dates from November 2020Use Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesCoordinates on WikidataArticles with hAudio microformatsPages including recorded pronunciationsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2022Articles needing additional references from November 2022All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from January 2023Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018Articles needing additional references from June 2022Articles prone to spam from September 2013Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WorldCat identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersPages using the Kartographer extension






 This page was last edited on 3 May 2023, at 16:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





