



Rourkela - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History







2Geography







3City layout







4Climate







5Economy







6Civic Administration







7Demographics







8Transportation


				Toggle Transportation subsection
			




8.1Road transportation







8.2Railways







8.3Air Transport









9Health Care







10Tourism & Recreation







11Education


				Toggle Education subsection
			




11.1Universities









12Sports


				Toggle Sports subsection
			




12.1Hockey







12.2Stadiums









13Media







14Festivals







15Notable residents







16References













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Rourkela




34 languages



تۆرکجهবাংলাCebuanoDeutschEspañolEsperantoفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisहिन्दीবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীItalianoKapampanganLietuviųമലയാളംमराठीمصرىBahasa MelayuNederlandsNorsk bokmålଓଡ଼ିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSimple EnglishŚlůnskiСрпски / srpskiSvenskaதமிழ்Татарча / tatarçaاردوTiếng ViệtWinaray中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


This article is about the city which is part of the greater metropolis of Odisha. For the greater metropolis, see Odisha.


City in Odisha, IndiaRourkelaCityClockwise from top: Hanuman Vatika, Biju Patnaik Hockey Stadium, Railway Station, NIT Rourkela, BPUT Campus & Rourkela Steel Plant,Nickname(s): "Steel City", "Ispat Mahanagar", "Engineering Hub", "Industrial Capital of Odisha"RourkelaLocation in Odisha, IndiaShow map of OdishaRourkelaRourkela (India)Show map of IndiaCoordinates: 22°14′57″N 84°52′58″E﻿ / ﻿22.24917°N 84.88278°E﻿ / 22.24917; 84.88278Coordinates: 22°14′57″N 84°52′58″E﻿ / ﻿22.24917°N 84.88278°E﻿ / 22.24917; 84.88278Country IndiaState OdishaDistrictSundargarhEstablished3 March 1954Government • TypeMunicipal Corporation • BodyRourkela Municipal Corporation • Member of Legislative AssemblyShri Sarda Prasad Nayak, (BJD) • MayorVacant • Municipal CommissionerSubhankar Mohapatra, IAS • SP of Rourkela Police DistrictShri Mukesh Kumar Bhamoo, IPSArea[1] • City102 km2 (39 sq mi)Elevation218.23 m (715.98 ft)Population (2011)[1] • City600,000 • RankIndia 80th, Odisha 3rd • Density6,504/km2 (16,850/sq mi) • Metro640,750[2][3]Demonym(s)Rourkelite RourkeliaLanguages • OfficialOdia and EnglishTime zoneUTC+5:30 (IST)PIN769001-769xxxTelephone code0661Vehicle registrationOD-14UN/LOCODEIN RRKWebsitewww.rmc.nic.in
Rourkela (pronunciation (help·info)) is a planned city located in the northern district Sundargarh of Odisha, India. It is the third-largest Urban Agglomeration in Odisha after Bhubaneswar and Cuttack. It is situated about 328 kilometres (204 mi) west of state capital Bhubaneswar and is surrounded by a range of hills and encircled by the rivers Koel, Sankha, & Brahmani. The city is also popularly known as Ispat Nagar and Steel City of Odisha as well. One of the largest integrated steel plant set up with German collaboration Known as Rourkela Steel Plant, of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL). It also has one of the premier national level technical institute known as National Institutes of Technology (NIT Rourkela). Every year, on 3 March Rourkela Day has been celebrated.
The city has been selected as smart city in the third phase of the National Smart Cities Mission on 20 September 2016, which is to drive economic growth and improve the quality of life of people by enabling local area development. Rourkela has been declared India's Fastest Moving City (East Zone 2–10 Lakh).[4] Rourkela is third largest city of Odisha state[5] & categorised as a Tier-2 city.


History[edit]
The name Rourkela originates from the local language of Sadri which means "Your Village" (Rour = Your & Kela comes from the word "Kila" which means Village).[citation needed] It comes under Sundergarh district of the Indian state of Odisha.[6]
The twin towns of Rourkela and Fertilizer Township, as well as their developed periphery, are located in areas that were once covered by dense forests. These forests were once a favourite hunting ground for the kings in the past. According to the census report of 2011, Rourkela has a population of 483,038 (Rourkela Industrial Township is 273,217 and Rourkela Town is 210,412) and the urban metropolitan area population is 536,450.[2][3] Then railway station of Rourkela was within the revenue village of Mahulpali.
India's first public sector steel plant facility was established in Rourkela with the help of German businesses Krupp and Demag. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the town was the largest German colony outside Germany.
There was a village called Durgapur in between Rourkela and Panposh stations. The construction of the sub-divisional court building was started in 1945 at the village Durgapur. Hence the nearby hills were also known as Durgapur Pahada (Durgapur Hills).  Today, it is known as Uditnagar. As a result, the two railway stations of Panposh and Rourkela came into recognition.
Following India's independence, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, wanted to make India an industrialized state in Soviet model of social development; giving wings to his dreams, Sri Biju Pattanaik convinced Pandit Nehru to consider the location of Rourkela for setting up a steel plant. The mineral-rich zone of Rourkela intersected by the rivers Brahmani, Koel and Sankha from two sides was aptly chosen for the same.
The preliminary survey for the steel plant at Rourkela was started in 1952 and the Government of Odisha issued a gazette notification on 16 February 1954. In accordance with the notification, the Government of Odisha acquired an area of about 80 square miles around Rourkela for the purpose of Steel Plant. The German private companies Krupp and Demag came forward to provide financial and technical help for the proposed steel plant at Rourkela. Krupp built Rourkela Steel Plant drawing from experience from its own works in Essen, Germany. The technical experts of the company advised the Government of India as well as the Government of Odisha for acquiring more land. As a result, a further area of 32 square kilometres was acquired out of 31 revenue villages. Almost 13,000 people in 2,424 families lost their dwelling. Later further 11,000 acres (4,500 ha) of land were acquired out of 31 revenue villages for the construction of Mandira Dam, a water embankment. Moreland was requisitioned for the purpose of constructing railway lines to Hatia and Barsuan. The construction of the Bondamunda Railway junction required the further acquisition of land which resulted in 20,000 people's displacement from their habitat. Though there was initial discontentment among the tribals about the land acquisition the authority largely resolved the land dispute, as many of the tribals were provided employment and accommodation. The displaced tribals were relocated to places such as Jalda, Jhirpani, Bisra, and Bondamunda. Their new settlement even extended beyond the river Koel.
Thousands of technical personnel from West Germany came to Rourkela to extend their technical assistance. Some of these Germans came with their family and their small diaspora created the 'Indo-German Club' to socialise. The club exists today with a well-stocked library known as Max Muller library. There are a plethora of local stories of Germans social encounters with tribals (local Adivasis) and people from other parts of India who had relocated themselves to Rourkela for employment. A large part of this population was from coastal and western Odisha who were trained by the German workforce to adapt to the steel plant's technology rigour. The steel plant, which was hugely surrounded by forest, many times witnessed wild animals straying into the plant area. A royal Bengal tiger's lugubrious death in the steel plant's massive blast furnace is a part of the city's folklore. There were also tales about the disappearance of Germans in the nearby Vedvyas cave and the dread whirlpool of river Koel. The river still accounts for human casualty as some day-trippers' wade into the water unaware of the maelstrom.[citation needed]

Geography[edit]
Rourkela is located at 84.54E longitude and 22.12N latitude in Sundergarh district of Odisha at an elevation of about 219 m (719 ft) above mean sea level. The area of Rourkela is 200 square kilometres approximately. Being situated on the Howrah-Mumbai rail track, Rourkela had an added advantage of the steel plant being set up there. Red and laterite soils are found here which are quite rich in minerals. The area near Rourkela is rich in iron-ore hence a steel plant is situated in Rourkela. Bolani and Barsuan are the two most prominent mines situated near the town. Rourkela is situated in a hilly region. A small hill range named Durgapur Pahad runs through the heart of the city dividing it into plant area and the steel township. The name "Durgapur" comes from an old village that existed at the foothills long time ago before the plant was set up. The South Koel River and Sankha rivers meet at Vedvyas, Rourkela and flow as a single river called Brahmani.

City layout[edit]
 Rourkela Municipal Commissioner and Rourkela ADM taking the award from Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
The Rourkela city is divided into two separate townships under the Census of India as Steel Township and Civil Township. The Residential quarter's colony of Rourkela Steel Plant having eighteen sectors on record is called Steel Township and the other part is called Civil Township. One smaller township Fertiliser was renamed sector-22, as this township is within the purview of SAIL.[7]
Steel Township is a modern industrial habitation mostly residential quarters, characterised by extensive green coverage under the Steel Plant Administration. A number of artistically crafted monuments not only add significant grace to the landscape of the township but also showcase the innovative usage of steel for creating objects of art.
The 16 km long Ring Road connects eighteen sectors and some major parts of the steel city including Chhend Colony, Civil Township, Udit Nagar, Basanti Nagar, Koel Nagar, Jagda, Jhirpani, Panposh, Fertiliser Township, Hamirpur, and Vedvyas.

Climate[edit]
Rourkela has a tropical climate and receives high rainfall during Southwest monsoon (June – September) and retreating Northeast monsoon (December – January). Average annual rainfall ranges between 160 and 200 cm. The minimum and maximum temperatures are in the range of 5 C to 49.7 C with a mean minimum and maximum temperature range of 12.0 C to 31.5 C during coldest and hottest months. Thirty six percent of the geographical area of the district has semi-evergreen or tropical dry deciduous forest.[8]


Climate data for Rourkela, Odisha


Month

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Year


Average high °C (°F)

27.0(80.6)

29.6(85.3)

34.9(94.8)

39.3(102.7)

41.4(106.5)

37.2(99.0)

31.3(88.3)

31.1(88.0)

31.5(88.7)

31.1(88.0)

28.6(83.5)

26.8(80.2)

32.5(90.5)


Average low °C (°F)

8.2(46.8)

14.4(57.9)

18.9(66.0)

23.7(74.7)

27.0(80.6)

26.8(80.2)

25.0(77.0)

24.9(76.8)

24.6(76.3)

21.5(70.7)

12.4(54.3)

6.0(42.8)

19.5(67.0)


Average rainfall mm (inches)

13(0.5)

20(0.8)

19(0.7)

15(0.6)

40(1.6)

221(8.7)

416(16.4)

419(16.5)

218(8.6)

56(2.2)

8(0.3)

3(0.1)

1,448(57)


Source: en.climate-data.org


Economy[edit]
 Suraksha Path bridge Near IG Park
Rourkela is the industrial capital of Odisha (Formerly Orissa). Rourkela, with a population of 6 lakhs and the first place in India to house the 1.8-million-ton integrated steel plant, joins the IT world through STPI. Location-wise it is integrated with infrastructure such as rail, road, air, abundant natural mineral resources such as water, land, power, rich pool of skilled people, top-rated social and civic infrastructure for reposing, and Universal friendliness. These factors have attracted many industrialists to choose Rourkela as their destination. Rourkela has never faced any sort of natural calamity whatsoever, except for some heavy rainfall. STPI has already set up and dedicated earth station in Rourkela to welcome the IT entrepreneurs for their uprising destination. NSPCL, Rourkela Rourkela Steel Plant
As Rourkela has tag as Steel City and house of many heavy industries like Steel, Sponge Iron, Chemical, Fabrication, Cement etc. There are number of small to large manufacturing industries for economic activity in and around the city.

Steel Authority of India - Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP)
NTPC-SAIL Power Company Limited, (NSPCL) Rourkela
OCL India Limited in Rajgangpur
Larsen & Toubro Fabrication Plant in Kansbahal
Kalunga Industrial Estate
Bondamunda-Rourkela Locomotive Shed (Indian Railway)
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), Rourkela
Civic Administration[edit]
 Rourkela Municipal Corporation
The steel city is divided mainly into two separate townships under Census of India as Steel Township and Civil Township. The Steel Township is a modern industrial habitation under the Steel Plant Administration, while the other sections are under the Rourkela Municipal Corporation. Some rural areas of South Rourkela are managed by the Jalda Panchayat.

Rourkela Municipal Corporation was declared as Municipal Corporation on November 2014. The civic body that governs the overall large section of Rourkela and look after the civic and infrastructural needs of the citizens.
Rourkela Development Authority was created by the Govt. of Odisha in the year 1995. The main objective of RDA is to undertake works pertaining to Construction of Housing Colony, Shopping Complex, Industrial Estate and to provide public amenities also undertake for Improvement & clearance of slums and re-development programmes in a planned manner.
Rourkela Smart City Limited city has been selected as smart city in the third phase of smart city list in September 2016. The objective is to promote city that provide core infrastructure and give a decent quality of life to its citizens, a clean and sustainable environment and apply ‘smart solutions'.
Central Water Commission has its sub-divisional headquarters near Panposh.

Demographics[edit]



Religions in Rourkela City (2011)

Religion

Percent


Hinduism
 
82.0%


Islam
 
8.11%


Christianity
 
7.36%


Others*
 
2.53%

*Others include Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs



As of 2011[update] India census, [9][10] Rourkela Metropolitan Area had a population of 536,450. Males constitute 54% of the population and females 46%. Rourkela has an average literacy rate of 75%, higher than the national average of 59.5% male literacy is 81%, and female literacy is 69%. In Rourkela, 12% of the population is under 6 years of age.

Density of Population – 6,696 per km2. approx.
Sex Ratio – 835 Female per 1000 male.
Per capita income – Highest in Odisha.
Population (Census 2011) – 552,970 where as Rourkela Industrial Township (210,412) & Rourkela Town (273,217).
Main Habitations in Rourkela – Civil Township, Koelnagar, Chhend Colony, Uditnagar, Steel Township (Eighteen Sectors), Fertiliser Township, Industrial Estate, Basanti colony, Railway colony, Jhirpani, Jagda, Panposh, Vedavyas, Bondamunda, Bisra and Kalunga.
Although in Sundargarh district, the spoken dialect is Sundargadia/Sambalpuri,but the register dialect of Odia (Central Odia) is also spoken here.
See also: List of cities in Odisha
Transportation[edit]
Road transportation[edit]
 Biju Expressway
Towards the end of 1946, most of the existing roads of the Sundargarh District were constructed. One National Highway i.e. (NH-143) passes through Rourkela which runs from Chas-Ranchi-Rourkela-Barkote-Banarpal – Junction with (NH-55). About 30  km of this highway passes through in and around Rourkela. Though the finalization of the project is awaited the planning for four linings of this highway is under consideration. One more National Highway i.e. NH – 215 which runs from Rajamunda (in Sundergarh district) to Panikoili in Jajpur district.

Other than this the SH-10 which runs from Rourkela to Sambalpur is another good road used in a large way particularly after its renovation and up gradation in 1995. This highway has recently been upgraded to a four-lane highway under the Biju Expressway project. There are a number of other departmental roads in and around Rourkela stretched in different parts. From a civic point of view, the Steel City consists of two parts i.e. Steel Township and Civil Township. While the ring road constructed by Rourkela Steel Plant Authority which has surrounded the Steel Township the other part of the ring road is Civil Township. The Steel Township roads are also maintained by the RSP authority. There are a number of daily Bus Services from Rourkela to different parts of Orissa and also, a few, to neighboring states like Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand. There are a number of city buses plying daily on different routes in the city. The new Bus Terminus at Uditnagar, Rourkela constructed by Rourkela Development Authority caters to various demands of Bus services to different parts of the states. Other than the New Bus stand, there are a number of ticket booking counters in different parts of the city for the public to book tickets for various destinations. In 2014, Government of Odisha decided to build Biju Expressway stretching from Rourkela to Jagdalpur [1] Rourkela Railway Station
Railways[edit]
Rourkela Railway junction is situated on the Howrah-Mumbai line under Chakradharpur division of South-Eastern Railway. Apart from Rourkela Station, the other stations in Sundargarh District are Bondamunda, Panposh, Rajgangpur, Kalunga, Kansbahal, etc. The city is well connected through Railway to Howrah & Mumbai. Apart from this, the city enjoys direct connectivity to Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore, Ranchi, Ahmedabad, & Pune and other major city's' of India. Rourkela is a profit-generating junction of South-Eastern Railway. from Rourkela junction, one line also goes to Biramitrapur whereas two from Bondamunda towards Howrah and Hatia respectively. One more line goes from Bimalagarh to Kiriburu.[11]
Bondamunda Loco Shed: Two locomotive sheds, one for steam locomotives and the other for diesel locomotives, was set up in the year 1950s. An electric locomotive shed was started in 1983 to accommodating WAM-4 locomotives, which is now accommodates 242 electric locomotives after expansion. 



Station name

Station code

Railway zone

Total platforms

Important trains


Rourkela Junction railway station

ROU

South Eastern Railway zone

5


Dhanbad Bhubaneswar Garib Rath Express
Sambalpur - Jammu Tawi Express
Rourkela - Gunupur Rajya Rani Express
Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - Tatanagar Antyodaya Express
Bhubaneswar Rajdhani Express
Mumbai CST–Howrah Duronto Express
Howrah-Mumbai Mail

Air Transport[edit]
Rourkela Airport is a public airport serving Rourkela, Odisha, India. It is located near Chhend Colony, 6 kilometers west of the city centre. The airport's terminal is being upgraded to handle scheduled operations. Under UDAN scheme. 

 Rourkela Airport Terminal
The airport is capable of handling ATR-72 type aircraft, an apron for parking of two aircraft at a time and a general aviation terminal.  The license for commercial usage of the airport was issued in January 2019. To handle commercial flights and traffic, the airport upgradation project involving expansion of the runway from 1,765 m to 1,930 m to handle larger aircraft, like the ATR-72 and De Havilland 8-400 aircraft, construction of a new apron, a parallel taxiway to the runway, a new passenger terminal building and a perimeter wall was taken up by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) at a cost of ₹ 64.24 crore, is underway.

Health Care[edit]
 Ispat General Hospital
There are a number of hospital facilities in Rourkela. People from different parts of Odisha and other states for seeking better health care access and treatment. Major medical facilities in the city are Ispat General Hospital, Jaiprakash Hospital, and Rourkela Govt. Hospital. 
Ispat General Hospital
Rourkela Government Hospital
Super speciality Hospital
Shanti Memorial Hospital
ESIC Model Hospital
Sub Divisional Hospital, Panposh
Lifeline Hospital
Community Welfare Society Hospital
Vesaj Patel Hospital
Lions Eye Hospital
Hi-Tech Medical College & Hospital
Jaiprakash Hospital and Research Centre, Uditnagar
Jaiprakash Hospital (Main Campus), Dayanand Nagar, Vedvyas

Tourism & Recreation[edit]
 Hanuman Vatika
Rourkela has three major recreation parks in Steel Township area. These are Indira Gandhi Park, Jubilee Park, and Ispat Nehru Park Udyaan along with the recently inaugurated Community Park at Civil Township and many other small parks in Civil Township area.
Bhanja Bhaban (comprising the Bhanja Kala Kendra and the Library) and Civic Centre hosts the State level and National Level Drama, Fashion and Dancing competitions throughout the year.
Hanuman Vatika a sprawling campus of area surrounding of 13 acres. statue of Hanuman is constructed with the height of 75 feet in the year of 1994. There are also a number of temples named as Bata Managla, Binayak, Vaishnodevi, Sarala, Dwadash Linga, Siva, Santoshi Maa, Maa Laxmi etc. constructed here for the devotees. Because of beauty scenario and green area, number of general visitors came to this place every day here.

The city has several cinemas, including Konark, UMA, Apsara, Deepak and Razzaq (presently all of them being turned into multiplex). A couple of multiplexes however have started recently, namely PSR Cinemas, Panposh Road and Cineplex, Shanti Towers. The latest attraction of the city is the new PVR multiplex opened inside the Forum Galleria mall in Civil Township. Several food courts like Ambagan Food Court, Sector 5 VIP Market, Sector 16 & 18 area street foods, Koel Nagar NAC Market, Khana Khazana, 7 AM & Max Restaurant and Bakery, The Cakery Bakery and Paris Bakery in New Rourkela, Green Chillyz behind Ambagan are some of the most visited places. Vedvyas CaveLuxury shopping Mall are Forum Galleria Mall in Civil Township &  CROSSROAD Mall is already started with Pantaloons, KFC, PizzaHut, Skechers etc. and other great brands available for shopping. There are many Shopping Malls under construction like Fe2 Arcade (Sector 5), Pluto Plaza in Chhend.
 Pitamahal Dam
Major Tourist Destinations in and around Rourkela are as follows:

Hanuman Vatika, Civil Township
Indira Gandhi Park,
Jubilee Park
Vedvyas (Vyas Cave & Mahadev Mandir)
Ispat Nehru Park Udyaan
Mandira Dam
Vaishnodevi Temple, Rourkela (Replica of Vaishnodevi Temple )
Khandadhar Waterfall
Lagoon Park
Pitamahal Dam
Sri Sai Mandir, Vedvyas
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Rourkela
Further information: List of schools and colleges in Rourkela
 Biju Patnaik University of Technology one of the biggest State-Run Universities in OdishaRourkela is the educational, technical and medical research hub of Western Odisha and even students from all parts of Odisha and some parts of neighboring states Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal come here to pursue higher education. city houses many English medium schools which provide CBSE and ICSE certificates to their students.
There are ICSE-ISC board schools like Sri Aurobindo's Rourkela School, St. Paul's School,[12] Mt. Carmel School, St. Joseph's Convent School,[13] Ispat English Medium School, Indo English School, Chinmaya Vidyalaya(E.M.), MGM English Medium School, DeSouza's School,[14] St. Thomas School, St. Mary's School, Loreto English School. Most of them are missionary based organizations run by licensee trustees. The students of various schools in Rourkela represent their schools in various national and international level competitions including IMO, IChO, and NASA.[15][16][17]
The CBSE board schools include Deepika English Medium School,[18] Delhi Public School,[19] Guru Nanak Public School (GNPS),[20] Dayanand Anglo-Vedic (DAV) School[21] and St. Arnold school. The Central government has its own Kendriya Vidyalaya in Sector-6 and in Bondamunda. It also has notable Odia medium schools like Chinmaya Vidyalaya, Saraswati Shishu Vidya Mandir (Sector-6), Ispat Vidyalaya (Sector 18) and Baji Rout High School.

 UGIE, Rourkela Main Campus
Utkalmani Gopabandhu Institute of Engineering, Rourkela also called the UGIE is a State Governmental Diploma Engineering Institution in the western Zone of Odisha, which was established in 1962 under the Directorate of Technical Education and Training (DTET), Odisha.
Rourkela has a Hi-Tech Medical College and Hospital Rourkela and is the only city in Odisha to have a private medical college outside Bhubaneshwar. The local leaders have demanded a government medical college in Rourkela. There are over 15 colleges for arts, science, and commerce streams under the Sambalpur University. Some of the famous ones are Government Autonomous College, Rourkela Municipal College, Ispat College, SG Women's College. There are also private engineering & Management colleges like Rourkela Institute of Management Studies (RIMS), DAMITS, Rourkela Institute of Technology (RIT), Kanak Manjari Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (KMIPS), Padmanava College of Engineering (PCE) these colleges come under the jurisdiction of Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT) and the head office is located in Chennd, Rourkela. [22]

Universities[edit]
NIT Rourkela Main GateBPUT Main Campus
National Institute of Technology Rourkela: NIT Rourkela is one of India's premier technical institute and is recognised as an Institute of National Importance. Its foundation stone was laid by the first Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru in the year of 1961. It was granted autonomy in 2002 and now functions independently under the Ministry of Education. Research at the institute carried out at one of the high-tech collaborative centers, such as the Centre for Robotics and Space Technology Incubation Centre.
Biju Patnaik University of Technology: (BPUT) headquarters in Rourkela came into being in November 2002 through an act of the Odisha state legislature and foundation stone was laid by Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, the hon’ble President of India. The main objective of university is to ensure a high quality of students coming out of the technical colleges through a common curriculum and uniform evaluation.

Sports[edit]
Hockey[edit]
The city becomes a sports hub with many stadiums and few sports academy in and around. The two stadiums are Biju Patnaik Hockey Stadium, with synthetic astroturf built by SAIL and Ispat Stadium that consist of a basketball ground, a chess hall, and a well-maintained volleyball ground nearby as well. The indoor stadium at Sector-20 hosts the badminton and Table Tennis events. The number of academies in the city has produced many nationally and internationally acclaimed Hockey players. The Ispat stadium and a number of game specific facilities from Odisha Govt. and SAIL have played a key role in honing the talents of the youngsters.

 Biju Patnaik Hockey StadiumIndia's former captains Dilip Tirkey, Ignace Tirkey and Prabodh Tirkey, deep defender Lazarus Barla started their careers in Rourkela. Rourkela has special hockey hostels for kids, upbringing the next generation players with some of the best amenities. It has produced a few Arjuna Awardees, including Minati Mohapatra. Olympians of repute like Paralympian Roshan and Rachita Mistry are from this city. Former hockey player and 1972 Summer Olympics Bronze medal winner, Michael Kindo, also happens to be a current resident of the city.[23] Indian national cricketer Sanjay Raul and the Under-19 world cup representative Chandrakant Barik play from this city. Pabitra Mohan Mohanty, the former national 'B' champion in chess and second only to Viswanathan Anand in national 'A' category is a resident of this city.
Stadiums[edit]
Rourkela has an international hockey stadium with synthetic astroturf which has been host to World Junior Hockey Championship and been a training center to most of the international Hockey players of India. Ispat Stadium has been hosted for several Ranji Trophy matches and youth ODIs. The city has produced many reputed Ranji players in the recent times. RSP does promote various different sports like – Cycling, Boxing, Archery, Soccer and lots more.

 Birsa Munda International Hockey Stadium
Sport Stadium

Birsa Munda International Hockey Stadium
Biju Patnaik Hockey Stadium (Sector-5)
Ispat Stadium (Sector-6)
Indoor Stadium (Sector-20)
Sports Hostel, Panposh
Birsa Munda Hockey Stadium
Sports Player
Hockey:

Binita Toppo (female hockey)
Dilip Tirkey
Lazarus Barla
Ignace Tirkey
Prabodh Tirkey (younger brother of Ignace Tirkey)
Birendra Lakra
Other sports:

Rachita Mistry (Sprinter)
Natraj Behera (Cricket)
Media[edit]
Rourkela City has a radio station of All India Radio (A.I.R) on FM Band 102.6 MHz since 24 June 1995. AIR Rourkela has one transmission from 06:00 AM to 11:10 PM daily. Other privately owned radio channels include Radio 92.7 BIG FM, Choklate 104 FM, 98.3 Tarang FM and 91.9 Sarthak FM. These channels broadcast Hindi and Odia film and non-film songs, talk shows and other entertainment programmes. Private Digital media channels include Rourkela Shines, Satya News Alert also operates from Rourkela to provide local news.

Festivals[edit]
Being a cosmopolitan city, Rourkela celebrates festivals such as Utkala Dibasa, Ram Navami, Pana Sankranti(Odia new year), Devasnan Purnima, Raja, Rath Yatra, Raji Karma Puja, Nuakhai, Sarna Puja, Durga Puja, Kali Puja, Chhat Puja, Kartik Purnima, Ganesh Puja, Laxmi Puja, Vishwakarma Puja, Deepawali, Dola Yatra, Holi, Bengali Nababarsha (Poila Boishak) etc.
The City Fest named as 1st Brahmani River Festival in its first edition was from 1 to 3 February 2019. It showcased the rich tribal heritage that is present in and around Rourkela and Sundargarh District.

Notable residents[edit]
Lazarus Barla, Indian hockey player
Natraj Behera, former Odisha cricket team captain
Samir Dash, entrepreneur
Debasish Ghose, Noted Academic, Professor at Indian Institute of Science
C. P. Gurnani, CEO & Managing Director of Tech Mahindra
Harish Hande, Magsaysay Award winner
Michael Kindo, Indian hockey player and Olympic medalist
Ramendra Kumar, award-winning children's fiction writer
Rachita Mistry, Olympiad
Bibhu Mohapatra, fashion designer, USA
Mira Nair, film director and author
Jual Oram, Current MP from Sundargarh, Chairman of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence[24] and Former Union Minister for Tribal Affairs (2014–2019)
Govinda Poddar, current Odisha cricket team captain
Dilip Ray, MLA (Rourkela), founder of Mayfair group of hotels
Biswapati Sarkar, writer and director
Dilip Tirkey, former captain, Indian National Hockey Team
Ignace Tirkey, former captain, Indian National Hockey Team
Prabodh Tirkey, former captain, Indian National Hockey Team
Amish Tripathi, author
White Town, singer and musician, UK


References[edit]


^ a b "Rourkela City".

^ a b "Census of India: Search Details". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 31 January 2016.

^ a b "Census of India: Search Details". Censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 31 January 2016.

^ Bhubaneswar & Rourkela awarded in 'Fastest Moving City' Category 

^ "List of Largest Cities in Odisha". worldlistmania. worldlistmania. 17 January 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2020.

^ Rourkela Reader, see "Rourkela from 1921 to 2005" (PDF). Retrieved on 15 April 2012.

^ About Rourkela and its History | Greater Rourkela | Rajgangpur | Kansbahal | Bonai of India. Rourkelacity.com. Retrieved on 15 April 2012.

^ Field Station- Rourkela (Odisha) Archived 9 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine. National Institute of Malaria Research. mrcindia.org

^ "Census of India: Search Details". Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2016.

^ "Census of India: Search Details". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 31 January 2016.

^ "Railways | Greater Rourkela | Rajgangpur | Kansbahal | Bonai of India".

^ Official Website of St. Paul's School, Rourkela

^ Official Website of St. Joseph's Convent School, Rourkela

^ Official Website of Desouza's School, Rourkela

^ Rourkela Girl Topped in NASA Contest | Rourkela | Rajgangpur | Kansbahal | Bonai of India. Webcache.googleusercontent.com (5 May 2010). Retrieved on 15 April 2012.

^ India to host Chemistry Olympiad | 33rd International Chemistry Olympiad. Hindu.com. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ http://deepikaemschool.org/academic1.php Archived 29 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Deepikaemschool.org. Retrieved on 15 April 2012.

^ Official Website of Deepika English Medium School, Rourkela

^ Official Website of Delhi Public School, Rourkela

^ Official Website of Guru Nanak Public School, Rourkela

^ Official Website of A.N. Khosla Dayanand Anglo-Vedic (DAV) Public School, Rourkela

^ bput.ac.in. bput.ac.in. Retrieved on 15 April 2012.

^ "Hockey World Cup 2018: An afternoon with Michael Kindo, India's world-beating defender who dazzled with his skills and smarts". 9 December 2018.

^ "Departmentally Related Standing Committees".


Places adjacent to Rourkela
Ambikapur
Simdega
Jamshedpur





Bilaspur

Rourkela

Kharagpur





Sambalpur
Talcher
Keonjhar

vteRourkela TopicsPlaces of worship
Hanuman Vatika
Gaytri Mandir
Guru Nanak Temple
Hamirpur Catholic Church
Jagarnath Temple
Kali Temple
Laxmi Narayan Temple
Shiva Temple
Tara Tarini Temple
Vaishno Devi
Administration
Rourkela Municipality
Stadiums
Biju Patnaik Hockey Stadium
Ispat Stadium
Uditnagar Stadium
Transport
Auto Rickshaw
Sampark Bus Services
Ring Road
Rourkela Railway Station
Rourkela Aerodrome
Shops and Markets
Big Bazaar
Daily Market
Ispat General Market (Ambagan)
Ispat Gajapati Market
NAC Market Koel Nagar
Sector 01 Market
Sector 09 Market Complex
VSS Market Chhend
VIP Market Sector 05
Industry
Grihasthi Udyog
Rourkela Steel Plant
Hospitals
Ispat General Hospital (IGH)
Community Welfare Society Hospital (CWS)
Rourkela Government Hospital (RGH)
Hi-Tech Medical College and Hospital

vteEducationCollegesEngineering
Padmanava College of Engineering
Rourkela Institute of Technology
S.K.D.A.V. Government Polytechnic
Utkalmani Gopabandhu Institute of Engineering
Medical
Hi-Tech Medical College and Hospital
Kanak Manjari Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Utkalmani Homoeopathic Medical College
General
Government Autonomous College
Municipal College
Ispat Autonomous College
Rourkela Law College
Sushilavati Government (SG) Women’s College
Business schools
DAMITS (Jagda)
Rourkela Institute of Management Studies
AWDI (Bastia Smruti Sadan)
SchoolsCBSE
Delhi Public School
Deepika English Medium School (Primary School
High School)
Guru Nanak Public School
Kendriya Vidyalaya
ICSE
Carmel School
Ispat English Medium School
MGM English Medium School
St. Joseph's Convent School, Hamirpur
St. Paul's School
State gov.
Govt. Highschool, Uditnagar
Government Junior College
S. G. Women's (Jr) College
Chinmaya Vidyalaya, Sector 06
Specially challenged
Home and Hope, Sector 17
School for Deaf, Sector 06
NGOs
Akshaya Patra Foundation
Deepika Mahila Sanghati
Universities
Biju Patnaik University of Technology
National Institute of Technology

LocalitiesNorth Rourkela
Sector 20
Sector 19
Sector 18
Sector 17
Sector 16
Sector 15
Sector 13
Sector 14
West Rourkela
Chhend Colony
Sector 09
Sector 08
Rourkela Civil Township
Panposh
Central Rourkela
Sector 05
Sector 06
Sector 07
Old Rourkela
Railway Colony
Timber Colony
Uditnagar
Basanti Colony
East Rourkela
Sector 01
Sector 02
Sector 03
Sector 04
Sector 21
Koel Nagar
Jagda
Jhirpani
Shakti Nagar
South Rourkela
Fertilizer (Sector 22)
Lathikata

vteSundergarh districtConstituencies
Biramitrapur
Bonai
Raghunathpali
Rajgangpur
Rourkela
Sundargarh
Talsara
Former Constituency1951-1974
Bisra
Towns and villages
Biramitrapur
Bondamunda
Chhend Colony
Hatibandha
Jalda
Kalunga
Kansbahal
Koira
Lattikata
Mandiakudar
OCL Industrial Township
Panposh
Rajgangpur
Raurkela Industrial Township
Rourkela
Sundergarh
Tensa
Other districts
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Bhadrak
Boudh
Cuttack
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gajapati
Ganjam
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Koraput
Malkangiri
Mayurbhanj
Nabarangpur
Nayagarh
Nuapada
Puri
Rayagada
Sambalpur
Subarnapur

vteMunicipalities of OdishaMunicipalCorporations
Bhubaneswar
Cuttack
Brahmapur
Sambalpur
Rourkela
Municipalities
Anandapur
Angul
Barbil
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Biramitrapur
Brajarajnagar
Byasanagar
Choudwar
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gunupur
Hinjilicut
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Jatani
Jeypore
Jharsuguda
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Nabarangpur
Nuapada
Paradip
Paralakhemundi
Phulbani
Puri
Rajgangpur
Rayagada
Sonepur
Sundergarh
Talcher
Basudebpur
Jaleswar
Koraput
Malkangiri
Pattamundai
Rairangpur
Soro
Sunabeda
Titlagarh
Umerkote
NAC
Asika
Athagad
Attabira
Balimela
Balugaon
Bamra
Banapur
Banki
Barapali
Baudhgarh
Bellaguntha
Belpahar
Bhanjanagar
Binika
Bhuban
Buguda
Burla
Chandabali
Chhatrapur
Chikiti
Digapahandi
Ganjam
Gop
Gopalpur
Gudari
Hirakud
Junagarh
Kamakshyanagar
Kantabanji
Karanjia
Kashinagara
Kabisuryanagar
Kesinga
Khalikote
Khandapada
Khariar
Khariar Road
Kodala
Konark
Kotpad
Kuchinda
Nayagarh
Nilagiri
Nimapada
Nuapada
Padmapur
Patnagarh
Pipili
Polasara
Purusottampur
Redhakhol
Rambha
Surada
Tarbha

vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rourkela&oldid=1153969342"
Categories: RourkelaSundergarh districtCities and towns in KosalaCompany towns in India1954 establishments in OrissaSmart cities in IndiaHidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum argumentsWebarchive template wayback linksUse Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from May 2020Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesPages using infobox settlement with possible nickname listCoordinates on WikidataPages using infobox settlement with possible demonym listArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2019Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WorldCat identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers






 This page was last edited on 9 May 2023, at 12:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





