



Simlipal National Park - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Description







2History


				Toggle History subsection
			




2.1Relocation of core villages









3Geography and climate







4Wildlife


				Toggle Wildlife subsection
			




4.1Flora







4.2Fauna









5Vegetation ecology of the Similipal biosphere reserve







6See also







7References







8External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Simlipal National Park




18 languages



বাংলাCebuanoDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisहिन्दीItalianoಕನ್ನಡമലയാളംଓଡ଼ିଆپنجابیPolskiРусскийᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSvenskaதமிழ்اردو
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Similipal)


National park in India
Similipal Tiger ReserveOdia: ଶିମିଳିପାଳ ଜାତୀୟ ଉଦ୍ୟାନIUCN category II (national park)Similipal Tiger Reserve, OdishaLocationOdisha, IndiaNearest cityBaripadaCoordinates21°50′N 86°20′E﻿ / ﻿21.833°N 86.333°E﻿ / 21.833; 86.333Coordinates: 21°50′N 86°20′E﻿ / ﻿21.833°N 86.333°E﻿ / 21.833; 86.333Area2,750 km2 (1,060 sq mi)Established1980Governing bodyMinistry of Environment and Forests, Government of IndiaWebsitewww.similipal.org
Simlipal is a tiger reserve in the Mayurbhanj district in the Indian state of Odisha covering 2,750 km2 (1,060 sq mi). It is part of the Mayurbhanj Elephant Reserve, which includes three protected areas—Similipal Tiger Reserve, Hadgarh Wildlife Sanctuary with 191.06 km2 (73.77 sq mi) and Kuldiha Wildlife Sanctuary with 272.75 km2 (105.31 sq mi).[1] Simlipal National Park derives its name from the abundance of red silk cotton trees growing in the area.[2]
The park is home to Bengal tiger, Asian elephant, gaur, and chausingha.[3]
This protected area is part of the UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves since 2009.[4][5]


Description[edit]


Graphs are temporarily unavailable due to technical issues.[Interactive fullscreen map]
Important location of Similipal Biosphere WS: Wildlife Sanctuary, WR: Water Reservoir, HT: Hill Top, O: Other Importance   Note: Owing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly

Simlipal Tiger Reserve covers an area of 2,750 km2 (1,060 sq mi), out of which 1,194.75 km2 (461.30 sq mi) forms the core area. The mean elevation is 900 m (3,000 ft). It has the peaks of Khairiburu at 1,178 m (3,865 ft) and Meghasani at 1,158 m (3,799 ft).[6]
The main waterfalls are the Barehipani Falls at 217 m (712 ft) high and the Joranda Falls 181 m (594 ft).[7]

History[edit]
 Signboard inside the park
Simlipal elephant reserve originated mainly as a hunting ground for the royalty. It was formally designated a tiger reserve in 1956 and under Project Tiger in May 1973. "Mugger Crocodile Scheme" was started in 1979 at Ramatirtha, Jashipur.[6]
The Government of Odisha declared Simlipal as a wildlife sanctuary in 1979 with an area of 2,200 square kilometres (850 sq mi). Later in 1980, the state government proposed 303 square kilometres (117 sq mi) of the sanctuary as a national park. Further in 1986, area of the national park was increased to 845.70 square kilometres (326.53 sq mi). Government of India declared Simlipal as a biosphere reserve in 1994. UNESCO added this national park to its list of Biosphere Reserves in May 2009.[4][5] There are 10,000 people living in 61 villages in the forest. That is why Simlipal is yet to be declared a full-fledged park, despite its having the status of one of the 18 biospheres of India.[3]

Relocation of core villages[edit]
In December 2013, 32 families from the Khadia tribe belonging to two hamlets of Upper Barhakamuda and Bahaghar were relocated outside the Tiger Reserve as per the guidelines set by National Tiger Conservation Authority. The village of Jamunagarh was relocated in September 2015. Following the relocation, tiger sightings in the core area has gone up. There are two villages, Kabatghai and Bakua, still present in the core area of Similipal. The Forest Department, wildlife NGOs and local administration have initiated talks with these villages on their relocation. However the tribals alleged these relocations to be forced and wished to claim their rights under the Forest Rights Act.[8]

Geography and climate[edit]
 Similipal different boundary map, black, yellow and red colors show Tiger Reserve, Wildlife Sanctuary and Biosphere Reserve, respectively.
The tiger reserve is in the Mayurbhanj district in the Indian state of Odisha. Simlipal Elephant Reserve is an ecosystem complete with forest vegetation (mainly sal trees), fauna and the adjoining Ho / Santhal tribal settlements.[2]
The high hills surround Meghasani/Tunkiburu, the highest peak in the park.[9] At an altitude of 1,165 metres (3,822 ft), followed by Khairiburu at above 1,000 metres (3,300 ft) elevation.[3] At least 12 rivers cut across the plain area. The prominent among them are Budhabalanga, Palpala Bhandan, Kharkai River and Deo.[9] This sprawling forest has two prominent waterfalls - Joranda/Jorodah 181 metres (594 ft) and Barheipani/Barhai 217 metres (712 ft) [7]
Summers are hot with temperatures around 40 °C (104 °F) whereas the winter months can be as low as 14 °C (57 °F). The rainfall ranges from moderate to heavy.[10]
Simlipal comes under a high cerebral malaria-prone zone. In cerebral malaria the sequestrated red blood cells can breach the blood brain barrier possibly leading to coma.[11] Cerebral malaria, if not detected, causes death.[12]
Initial symptoms of cerebral malaria are often mistaken as those of acute jaundice. There have been many recorded cases of death due to cerebral malaria after visits to Simlipal.[13] Therefore, it is extremely important for tourists to be aware of the threats posed by cerebral malaria before planning a visit to Simlipal.[citation needed]
In 2021, large fires broke out in the Simlipal Tiger Reserve, and continued to burn for over two weeks before they were brought under control.[14] The 2021 Simlipal forest fires resulted in widespread environmental damage, and caused an exodus of fauna from the park into nearby human habitations.[15]

Wildlife[edit]
 Joranda Waterfall, Similipal
Flora[edit]
The park is a treasure house of 1,076 species of plants belonging to 102 families. 96 species of orchids have been identified here.[3] It lies in the Eastern Highlands moist deciduous forests ecoregion, with tropical moist broadleaf forest and tropical moist deciduous forests with dry deciduous hill forest and high level Sal forests.[2] The grasslands and the savannas provide grazing grounds for the herbivores and hiding places to the carnivores. The forest boasts of innumerable medicinal and aromatic plants, which provide a source of earnings for the tribal people. Eucalyptus, planted by the British during the 1900s, are also found.[3]

Fauna[edit]
A total of 42 species of mammals, 242 species of birds and 30 species of reptiles have been recorded in Simlipal National Park.[3] The major mammals include:

tiger,
leopard,
Asian elephant,
sambar,
barking deer,
gaur,
jungle cat,
wild boar,
chausingha (four horned antelope),
giant squirrel and
common langur.
231 species of birds nest in these forests. The commonly found birds are:

Red junglefowl,
hill mynah,
peafowl,
Alexandrine parakeet and
crested serpent eagle.
Also found in the reserve are:

grey hornbill,
Indian pied hornbill,
Malabar pied hornbill and
Indian trogon.[citation needed]
The park has a sizeable population of reptiles, which includes snakes and turtles. The "Mugger Crocodile Management Programme" has helped the Mugger crocodile (Crocodylus palustris) to survive and flourish in and on the banks of Khairi river.[2]

Vegetation ecology of the Similipal biosphere reserve[edit]
Vegetation analysis of the forest ecosystem of Similipal Biosphere Reserve (SBR) was carried out at 10 sites to study changes in structure and composition in plant community distributed in the core (undisturbed) and buffer (disturbed) areas of the reserve. The study reveals a higher number of herbs and shrubs and a lower number of trees in the buffer area indicating greater anthropogenic disturbance. Total tree basal area varied from 48.7 to 78.61 m 2 ha -1 in the buffer area and 81.4 to 104.9 m 2 ha -1 in the core area. The density of saplings and seedlings was nearly equal both at the disturbed and undisturbed sites. However, the rate of conversion of saplings to trees was greater at undisturbed sites. The lower rate of conversion at disturbed sites is due to the removal of seedlings of most of the tree species. The high herb diversity (2.14 - 3.50) and low tree diversity (2.14 - 2.98) in buffer area is a result of Environmental openings providing greater opportunity for the recruitment of herbs and shrubs. The presence of only a few individuals of major tree species in larger diameter classes and more in young diameter classes in buffer areas indicate that the plant community was subjected to disturbance and are in the regenerating stage. Greater fluctuation in the species / genus ratio in the herbaceous species at sites of the buffer area in comparison to core area has led to variation in developmental status of plant communities among the core and buffer areas of the reserve. However, the presence of the seedlings of dominant tree species in the buffer area may help in the restoration of the plant communities in the long-run, provided protection means are strengthened and biotic stress reduced.[16]

See also[edit]
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
References[edit]


^ "Similipal Tiger Reserve".

^ a b c d "Simlipal National Park". Department of tourism, Odisha. Retrieved 12 December 2009.

^ a b c d e f Jena, M. L. (2005). "Similipal's Scenic Splendor". Women's Era. Vol. 32, no. 752. pp. 110–112.

^ a b "Three Indian sites added to UNESCO list of biosphere reserves". Sify. 2009. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2009.

^ a b "UNESCO Designates 22 New Biosphere Reserves". Environment News Service. 2009. Retrieved 30 May 2009.

^ a b "Similipal Tiger Reserve". www.wwfindia.org. Retrieved 4 June 2022.

^ a b "Similipal Tiger Reserve".

^ "Relocation of tribal people living around Similipal Tiger Reserve forceful, claim locals". Mongabay-India. 2020. Retrieved 12 January 2021.

^ a b "Similipal Tiger Reserve".

^ https://mausam.imd.gov.in/imd_latest/contents/rainfallinformation.php[bare URL]

^ Adams, S; Brown, H; Turner, G (2002). "Breaking down the blood–brain barrier: signaling a path to cerebral malaria?". Trends Parasitol. 18 (8): 360–6. doi:10.1016/S1471-4922(02)02353-X. PMID 12377286.

^ Idro, R.; Marsh, K.; John, C. C.; Newton, C. R. (2010). "Cerebral Malaria". Pediatric Research. 68 (4): 267–274. doi:10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181eee738. PMC 3056312. PMID 20606600.

^ "Report of the Fact Finding Team on Infant Death in Simlipal Sanctuary" (PDF).

^ "Simlipal park fire under control, rainfall helps". The Hindu. PTI. 12 March 2021. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 16 March 2021.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)

^ Suffian, Mohammad (9 March 2021). "Habitat burnt in Simlipal forest fire, wild animals enter human areas in Odisha". India Today. Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ Mishra, R.K (2008). "Vegetation ecology of the Similipal biosphere reserve, Orissa, India". Researchgate. Retrieved 20 October 2022.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Simlipal National Park.

 Simlipal National Park travel guide from Wikivoyage
vteProtected areas of OdishaBiosphere reserves
Simlipal Biosphere Reserve
National parks
Bhitarkanika
Similipal
Wildlife sanctuaries
Baisipalli
Balimela
Balukhand-Konark
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Chandaka
Debrigarh
Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary
Hadgarh
Kapilasa
Karlapat
Kondakameru
Kotgarh
Kuldiha
Lakhari Valley
Nandankanan
Saptasajya
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Ushakothi
Bird sanctuaries
Chilika Lake
Nalbana Bird Sanctuary
Zoos
Nandankanan Zoological Park
Protected areas of India
vteEastern GhatsRivers
Champavathi River
Godavari
Gosthani River
Gundlakamma River
Kaveri
Krishna
Kundu River
Mahanadi
Mahendratanaya
Nagavali
Palar
Penner River
Ponnaiyar
Rushikulya
Sabari River
Sarada River
Sileru River
Sweata Nadi
Vasishta Nadi
Vellar
Vamsadhara
Regions
Deccan Plateau
Kolar Plateau
Hills
Ajodhya
Bilgiri (Biligirirangan)
Chitteri
Erramala
Garhjat
Kalrayan
Karanthamalai
Kolli
Lankamalla
Mettur
Nallamalla
Pachaimalai
Palamalai
Palkonda
Simhachalam
Shevaroy
Sirumalai
Vada Chennimalai
Velikonda
Peaks
Arma Konda
Bodhamalai
Deomali
Mahendragiri
Malayagiri
Waterfalls
Agaya Gangai
Badaghagara
Barehipani
Dokarichanchara
Duduma
Joranda
Khandadhar Falls, Kendujhar
Khandadhar Falls, Sundargarh
Kiliyur
Mayil Uthu
Mangalam
Periyar
Phurlijharan
Pudur Megan
Sanaghagara
Talakona
Ubbalamadugu
Parks & Reserves
Badrama Wildlife Sanctuary
Chilika Bird Sanctuary
Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary
Gundla Brahmeswaram Wildlife Sanctuary
Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary
Kanger Ghati National Park
Kinnerasani Wildlife Sanctuary
Kolleru Lake Bird Sanctuary
Krishna Wildlife Sanctuary
Koundinya Wildlife Sanctuary
Lakhari Valley Wildlife Sanctuary
Sri Lankamalleswara Wildlife Sanctuary
Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Nalbana Bird Sanctuary
Nelapattu Bird Sanctuary
Papikonda Wildlife Sanctuary
Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary
Rollapadu Wildlife Sanctuary
Simlipal National Park
Sri Venkateswara National Park
Telineelapuram and Telukunchi Bird Sanctuaries
Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary
Vedanthangal Bird Sanctuary
States
Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka
Odisha
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
West Bengal

vteNational parks of India
Protected areas of India
Ministry of Environment and Forests (India)
Andaman andNicobar Islands
Campbell Bay
Galathea
Mahatma Gandhi
Middle Button Island
Mt. Harriet Island
North Button Island
Rani Jhansi
Saddle Peak
South Button Island
  Andhra Pradesh
Sri Venkateswara
Papikonda
Arunachal Pradesh
Mouling
Namdapha
Assam
Dibru-Saikhowa
Dehing Patkai
Kaziranga
Manas
Nameri
Orang
Raimona
Bihar
Valmiki
Chhattisgarh
Indravati
Kanger Ghati
Goa
Mollem
Gujarat
Blackbuck
Gir
Gulf of Kutch
Vansda
Haryana
Kalesar
Sultanpur
Himachal Pradesh
Great Himalayan
Pin Valley
Khirganga
Jammu & Kashmir
Dachigam
Salim Ali National Park
Kishtwar
Overa-Aru
Hirpora
Hokersar
Laddakh
Hemis
Jharkhand
Betla
Karnataka
Anshi
Bandipur
Bannerghatta
Kundremukh
Nagarhole
Kerala
Anamudi Shola
Eravikulam
Mathikettan Shola
Pampadam Shola
Periyar
Silent Valley
Madhya Pradesh
Bandhavgarh
Fossil
Kanha
Kuno
Madhav
Panna
Pench
Sanjay
Satpura
Van Vihar
Maharashtra
Chandoli
Gilbert Hill
Gugamal
Karnala
Navegaon
Pench
Sanjay Gandhi
Tadoba
Manipur
Keibul Lamjao
Sirohi
Meghalaya
Balphakram
Nokrek
Mizoram
Murlen
Phawngpui
Nagaland
Intangki
Odisha
Bhitarkanika
Simlipal
Rajasthan
Darrah
Desert
Keoladeo
Ranthambhore
Sariska
Sikkim
Khangchendzonga
Tamil Nadu
Guindy
Gulf of Mannar
Anamalai
Mudumalai
Mukurthi
Palani Hills
Telangana
Kasu Brahmananda Reddy
Mahavir Harina Vanasthali
Mrugavani
Tripura
Clouded Leopard
Rajbari
Uttar Pradesh
Dudhwa
Uttarakhand
Jim Corbett
Gangotri
Govind Pashu Vihar
Nanda Devi
Rajaji
Valley of Flowers
West Bengal
Buxa
Gorumara
Neora Valley
Singalila
Sundarbans
Jaldapara

Category

vteTiger reserves of India
National Tiger Conservation Authority
Project Tiger
Assam
Kaziranga Tiger Reserve
Manas Tiger Reserve
Nameri Tiger Reserve
Orang Tiger Reserve
Arunachal Pradesh
Kamlang Wildlife Sanctuary
Namdapha Tiger Reserve
Pakhui Tiger Reserve
Andhra Pradesh
Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Bihar
Valmiki Tiger Reserve
Chhattisgarh
Achanakmar Tiger Reserve
Indravati Tiger Reserves
Udanti & Sitanadi Tiger Reserve
Jharkhand
Palamau Tiger Reserve
Karnataka
Bandipur Tiger Reserve
Kali Tiger Reserve
Nagarhole Tiger Reserve
Bhadra Tiger Reserve
Anshi Dandeli Tiger Reserve
Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary
Kerala
Periyar Tiger Reserve
Parambikulam Tiger Reserve
Madhya Pradesh
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve
Bori-Satpura Tiger Reserve
Kanha Tiger Reserve
Panna Tiger Reserve
Pench Tiger Reserve
Sanjay-Dubri Tiger Reserve
Maharashtra
Melghat Tiger Reserve
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve
Shahayadri Tiger reserve
Nagzira-Navegaon Tiger Reserve
Bor Tiger Reserve
Mizoram
Dampa Tiger Reserve
Odisha
Satkosia Tiger Reserve
Simlipal Tiger Reserve
Sunabeda Tiger Reserve
Rajasthan
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve
Sariska Tiger Reserve
Mukandra Hills Tiger Reserve
Tamil Nadu
Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve
Anamalai Tiger Reserve
Mudumalai Tiger Reserve
Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve
Telangana
Kawal Tiger Reserve
Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Amrabad Tiger Reserve
Uttar Pradesh
Dudhwa Tiger Reserve
Pilibhit Tiger Reserve
Uttarakhand
Corbett Tiger Reserve
Rajaji Tiger reserve
West Bengal
Buxa Tiger Reserve
Sunderbans Tiger Reserve

Category





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simlipal_National_Park&oldid=1146437494"
Categories: IUCN Category IINational parks in OdishaTiger reserves of IndiaEastern GhatsBiosphere reserves of IndiaMayurbhanj districtChota Nagpur dry deciduous forestsEastern Highlands moist deciduous forestsProtected areas established in 19801980 establishments in OrissaHidden categories: Pages using the Graph extensionPages with disabled graphsAll articles with bare URLs for citationsArticles with bare URLs for citations from August 2022CS1 maint: othersUse dmy dates from August 2019Use Indian English from August 2019All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles containing Odia-language textCoordinates on WikidataArticles containing OSM location mapsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2021Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012Commons category link is on WikidataPages using the Kartographer extension






 This page was last edited on 24 March 2023, at 21:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





