



Mukteshvara Temple, Bhubaneswar - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History







2Architecture


				Toggle Architecture subsection
			




2.1Porch







2.2Vimana







2.3Sanctum







2.4Jagamohana







2.5Others









3Religious significance







4In popular culture







5Gallery







6See also







7Notes







8References







9External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Mukteshvara Temple, Bhubaneswar




9 languages



বাংলাDeutschहिन्दीമലയാളംمصرىଓଡ଼ିଆதமிழ்తెలుగుاردو
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Muktesvara deula)
10th-century Hindu temple in Bhubaneshwar, Odisha, India


For other uses, see Mukteshwar Mahadev Temple.
Mukteshwara TempleReligionAffiliationHinduismDistrictKhurdaDeityMukteshwara (Shiva)LocationStateOdishaCountryIndiaOdishaGeographic coordinates20°14′33.72″N 85°50′25.41″E﻿ / ﻿20.2427000°N 85.8403917°E﻿ / 20.2427000; 85.8403917Coordinates: 20°14′33.72″N 85°50′25.41″E﻿ / ﻿20.2427000°N 85.8403917°E﻿ / 20.2427000; 85.8403917ArchitectureTypeKalinga architectureCompleted950–975 CE
 The decorated torana archway of Mukteshwar Temple
Mukteshwara Temple (IAST: Mukteśwara; also spelt Mukteswara) is a 10th-century Hindu temple dedicated to Shiva located in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. The temple dates back to 950–975 CE[1] and is a monument of importance in the study of the development of Hindu temples in Odisha. The stylistic development the Mukteswara marks the culmination of all earlier developments, and initiates a period of experiment which continues for an entire century, as seen in such temples as the Rajarani Temple and Lingaraj temple, both located in Bhubaneswar.[2] It is one of the prominent tourist attractions of the city.[3]


History[edit]
The Mukteshvara Temple is found to be the earliest work from the Somavamshi period. Most scholars believe the temple is the successor to Parashurameshvara Temple and built earlier to the Brahmeswara Temple (1060 CE). Percy Brown puts the date of construction of the temple to 950 CE. The presence of a torana, which is not part of any other temple in the region, makes this temple unique and some of the representations indicate the builders were starters of a new culture.[4] K.C. Panigrahi places the temple to be built during 966 CE and postulates that the Somavamshi king Yayati I built the temple. He also associates the legend of Kirtivassa to this temple, but the postulation is not accepted as Kirtivasa is associated with Lingaraja, though both were built at the same time for the same deity, Shiva. There is no historic evidence to conclude that Yayati had built the temple.[5]

Architecture[edit]
 A typical Deula temple plan. The plan is similar to Mukteshvara Temple, except that there is no second pidha deula and khakhara deula
 Ekamra Heritage Wall Mukteswar Temple Bhubaneswar2
This architecture is one of the basic reasons why Mukteshvara Temple is also known as the "Gem of Odisha architecture" or "Kalinga Architecture" .[6] The temple faces west and is constructed in a lower basement amidst a group of temples. The pyramidal roof to the jagamohana present in the temple was the first of its kind over the conventional two tier structure.[7] The temple is a small one compared to other larger temples in Bhubaneswar. The temples is enclosed within an octagonal compound wall with elaborate carvings on it. It is believed that the experiment of newer pattern in the temple showed a mature phase compared to its predecessors and culminated the beginning of replication of similar pattern in the later temples in the city. The temple has a porch, called torana, which acts as the gateway to the octagonal compound. The temple has two structures namely, the vimana (structure above the sanctum) and a mukhasala, the leading hall, both of which are built on a raised platform. The temple is the earlies to be built in pithadeula type.

 Torana decoration
 Kritimukha motif on the South face of vimana
 Interior ceiling
Porch[edit]
The most important feature of the Mukteshvara Temple is the torana, or the arched gateway, dating back to about 900 CE and showing the influence of Buddhist architecture.[8] The arched gateway has thick pillars that have strings of beads and other ornaments carved on statues of smiling women in languorous repose. The porch is a walled chamber with a low, massive roof and internal pillars. The combination of vertical and horizontal lines is skilfully arranged so as to give dignity of buildings of moderate height. This early astylar form of the temple is best illustrated in this temple.[9] The gateway has sculptures that range from elaborate scrolls to pleasant female forms and figures of monkeys and peacocks.[10] The front and back of the arch are similar in design.[11]

Vimana[edit]
The Vimana is square in plan and is built in a raised platform with pilasters in each facade. The shikara is small compared to other temples; it has four Natarajas on and four kirthimukhas on the four faces. The top portion of the shikara has the kalasa.[4] The shikara is 10.5 metres (34 ft) tall, with every inch sculpted with decorative patterns, architectural patterns and sculpted figures. A new form of decoration called bho, possibly developed here, became a prominent feature in later Odishan temples. It is a highly ornate chaitya window crowned by masked demon head and dwarf figures.[7]

Sanctum[edit]
The sanctum is sculpted with beautiful damsels exhibiting feminine charms entwined with nagas and naginis. The sanctum is cubical from the inside with offset walls in the outside.[7]

Jagamohana[edit]
This distinctive 10th-century temple is one of the smallest and compact temples. The jagamohana is 35 m (115 ft) tall.[10] It is decorated with intricate carvings by the Vishwakarma Moharana sculptors. The temple is regarded as a gem of Nagara architecture of Kalinga architecture.[12] Except for the rectangular plan of its jagamohana, it is the earliest example of what may be termed proper Odisha temple type; a vimana with a curvelinear spire and a jaganmohana with a stepped pyramidal roof.[13] 
The temple's red sandstone is covered with exquisite carvings of lean sadhus or holy men and voluptuous women encrusted with jewels. The images of Ganga and Yamuna are carved next to Chanda and Prachanda. The torana is present in front of the jagamohana. The figure of Lakulisa, seated in bhumispara-mudra and holding a lakuta is present on the lintel of the jagamohana. The figures of Gajalakshmi, Rahu and Ketu are also sculpted in the structure.[4] A small extension from the side roof of the jagamohana has the image of a lion sitting on its hind legs. The exterior walls of the structure are decorated with pilasters with nagas and naginis.[7]

Others[edit]
The doorway to the inner sanctum houses the image of Ketu with three hooded snakes, commonly regarded as the ninth planet in the Hindu mythology.[10]
There is a tank in the eastern side of the temple and a well in the south-western corner. A dip in the first known as the Marichi Kunda is believed to cure infertility in women. There are other shrines within the temple complex with lingam inside, which were used as offering shrines.[10] The doorway of the temple is ornate.[11] The temple is enclosed by a low compound wall that follows the contours of the temple. The temple has sculptures both inside and outside the structure. The compound walls leaves a very small passage separating the shrine.[7]

Religious significance[edit]
Mukteshvara means "Lord of Freedom" (from the cycle of births and deaths). The temple is dedicated to Hindu God Shiva.[8] There are a number of sculptures of skeletal ascetics in teaching or meditation poses. Some scholars correlate the role of the temple as a centre for Tantric initiation with the name Mukteshvara as a possible thesis.[10] The outer face of the compound wall has niches of Hindu deities like Saraswathi, Ganesha and Lakulisha (the fifth century founder of the Pashupata sect of tantric Shaivism).[4][10] The numerous images of Lakulisha are found in miniature forms within Chaitya arches, showing various mudras like yoga, Bhumispara and vyakyana with yogapatta tied to their knees. They are accompanied by the images of the disciples.[4] According to tradition, barren women give birth to sons if they take a dip in the Marichi Kunda tank in the premises of the temple on the night before Ashokashtami car festival. On the evening, the water in the tank is sold to the public.[14]

In popular culture[edit]
The Department of Tourism of the state government organises a three-day yearly dance function called Mukteswar Dance Festival in the temple premises. This festival celebrates the features of Odissi, the classical dance form of Odisha and Odissi music, the classical music of the same tradition. Popular Odissi dancers perform during the function, accompanied by musical instruments like mardala.[15][16] The event is webcast in the state government portal.[17][18]

Gallery[edit]
 Panorama view of Mukteswar temple
 




Artist playing flute in Mukteswar temple






Side view of Mukteshvara Temple






Detail of the Arched Gateway depicting two Apsaras resting on each side






Vimana






The Arched Gateway to the Mukteshvara Temple






Carvings with kritimukha motif






Sculpture of Lord Vishnu in the precincts of the temple






Sculpture of a dancer in the precincts of the temple






Eka-tantri vina in the hands of a dancer.






Mukteswar Temple 01




See also[edit]
List of temples in Bhubaneswar
Notes[edit]


^ Smith, Walter (1991). "Images of Divine Kings from the Mukteśwara Temple, Bhubaneswar". Artibus Asiae. 51 (1/2): 90–106. doi:10.2307/3249678. JSTOR 3249678.

^ Smith, Walter (1994). The Mukteśvara Temple in Bhubaneswar. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited. p. xix. ISBN 81-208-0793-6.

^ Gopal, Madan (1990).  K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages. Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 175.

^ a b c d e Parmeshwaranand, Swami (2004). Encyclopedia of the Śaivism. Sarup & Sons. pp. 164–165. ISBN 81-7625-427-4.

^ Parida, A.N. (1999). Early Temples of Orissa (1st ed.). New Delhi: Commonwealth Publishers. pp. 93–97. ISBN 81-7169-519-1.

^ "Temple Architecture". Cultural Department - Government of Odisha. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014.

^ a b c d e Jāvīd, ʻAlī; Javeed, Tabassum (2008). World Heritage Monuments. Algora Publishing. pp. 192–194. ISBN 9780875864846.

^ a b "Bhubaneswar tourist attractions". Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ A history of fine art in India and Ceylon: from the earliest times to the present day. P.25. Vincent Arthur Smith.

^ a b c d e f "Bhubaneswar Mukteshvara Temple". Tourism Development Corporation of Odisha. Archived from the original on 25 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ a b Allen, Margaret Prosser (1991). Ornament in Indian Architecture. Associated University Press Inc. pp. 206–207. ISBN 0-87413-399-8.

^ General Studies History 4 Upsc.P.B-158.Reddy

^ Designs from Orissan Temples. P.24. D.P. Ghosh, Nirmal Kumar Bose and Y.D. Sharma

^ E.J. pp.96-107

^ "Bhubaneswar Mukteshvara Temple". Tourism Development Corporation of Odisha. Archived from the original on 12 April 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ "Mukteswar dance festival from January 14 to 16". The Hindu. 12 January 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2012.

^ "Odisha Government webcast". Government of Odisha. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2006.

^ "Season of melas". Daily News. Sri Lanka. 23 December 2010. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 2 June 2015 – via HighBeam Research.


References[edit]
E.J., Brills (1973). Contributions to Asian Studies: 1973. Netherlands: Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 9789004035386.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mukteshvara Temple.

https://www.lingaraj-temple.com/mukteswara-temple/

Temples of Orissa
Mukteshvara Temple
vteTemples in BhubaneswarShiva Temples
Aisanyesvara
Akhadachandi
Astasambhu
Bharateswar Temple
Bharati Matha
Bhringesvara
Bhrukutesvar
Brahmeswara Temple
Byamokesvara Temple
Chakreshvari
Champakesvara Siva Temple
Chandrasekhara
Chintamanisvara Siva Temple
Dishisvara Siva Temple
Gangesvara Siva Temple
Jaleswar Siva Temple Precinct
Kapilesvara Siva Temple
Kartikesvara Siva Temple
Labesvara Siva Temple
Ladu Baba Temple
Lakhesvara
Lingaraja Temple
Madneswar
Mangalesvara
Megheswar
Mukteshvara
Nagesvara
Pabaneswara Temple
Parsurameswar Temple
Purvesvara Siva Temple
Rajarani Temple
Rameshwar Deula
Sarvatresvara
Sivatirtha Matha
Subarnesvara
Sukutesvara Temple
Svapnesvara Siva Temple
Talesvara Siva Temple
Uttaresvara
Yameshwar Temple
Other Temples
Ananta Vasudeva Temple
Baitala Deula
Brahma Temple, Bindusagar
Devasabha Temple
Gandhi Garabadu Precinct Vishnu Temple
Ram Mandir, Bhubaneswar
Suka Temple
Vishnu Temple, Bhubaneswar

Hindu temples in Odisha
Shakti temples in Odisha
Shiva temples in Odisha

vteShaivismHistoryDeities
Shiva
Sadyojata
Vamadeva
Aghora/Bhairava
Tatpurusha
Ishana

Nataraja
Dakshinamurthy
Harihara
Shakti
Ardhanarishvara
Sati
Parvati
Ganesha
Kartikeya
Nandi
Texts
Shvetashvatara Upanishad
Shivarahasya Purana
Shiva Purana
Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta
Tirumurai
Mantra/Stotra
Om Namah Shivaya
Rudrashtakam
Mahāmrityunjaya
Shiva Tandava
Sahasranama
Chalisa
Shri Rudram
Shiva Mahimna
Traditions
Shaiva Siddhanta
Pashupata Shaivism
Kapalika
Aghori
Kaula
Trika Shaivism
Veera Shaivism
Siddha Siddhanta
Shiva Advaita
Shaiva Smartas
Shiva temple
Amarnath
Brihadeeswarar
Kailash Mansarovar
Katas Raj
Lingaraja
Meenakshi Sundareshwarar
Tiruchengode
Vadakkum Nathan
Panch Kedar
Kedarnath
Tungnath
Rudranath
Madhyamaheshwar
Kalpeshwar
Pancha Sabhai
Rathina
Pon
Velli
Thamira
Chitira
Pancha Bhoota
Chidambaram, Ether
Kalahasti, Air
Annamalaiyar, Fire
Thiruvanaikaval, Water
Ekambareswarar, Earth
Jyotirlingas
Bhimāśankara
Ghuṣmeśvara/Grishneshwar
Kedāranātha
Mallikārjuna
Mahākāleśvara
Nāgeśvara
Omkāreśvara
Rāmeśvara/Ramanathaswamy
Somanātha
Tryambakeśvara
Vaidyanātha
Viśveśvara/Vishwanath

Observances
Kanwar Yatra
Lingam
Rasalingam
Maha Shivaratri
Pradosha
Shiva Puja
Siddha
Vibhuti
Other names

Category
Portal

vteShiva TemplesTrilinga Kshetras
Draksharama
Srisailam
Kaleshwaram
Pancha Kedaras
Kedarnath
Tungnath
Rudranath
Madhyamaheshwar
Kalpeshwar
Pancharama Kshetras
Amararama
Draksharama
Ksheerarama
Kumararama
Somarama
Pancha Sabhas
Emerald/Rathinam, Thiruvalangadu
Gold/Pon, Thillai
Silver/Velli, Madurai
Copper/Thamiram, Nellai
Art/Chithiram, Courtallam
Panchabhuta Sthalams
Kanchipuram (Earth)
Annamalai (Fire)
Thiruvanaikaval (Water)
Chidambaram (Ether) 
Srikalahasthi (Air)
Pancheshwarams
Kethishwaram
Koneshwaram
Munneshwaram
Naguleshwaram
Thondeshwaram
Jyotirlinga Sthalas
Somnath
Srisailam
Mahakaleshwar
Omkareshwar
Kedarnath
Bhimashankar
Kashi Vishvanath 
Trimbakeshwar
Vaidyanath
Nageshvara
Rameshwaram
Grishneshwar
Significant
275 Paadal Petra Sthalams
Brihadeeswaram
Amarnath
Lingaraj
Gokarna
Kudalasangama
Vaikom
Thrissur
Thiruvarur
Khajuraho
More...
Out of India
Bhadreshwaram (Vietnam)
Fire temple (Azerbaijan)
Ganga Talao (Mauritius)
Iraivan temple (USA)
Katasraj (Pakistan)
Kadhalishwaram ruins (China)
Kethishwaram (Sri Lanka)
Koneshwaram (Sri Lanka)
Kokkadicholai Thaanthonreeswaram
Mt. Kailash (Tibet)
Madhya Kailash Temple (South Africa)
Pashupatinath (Nepal)
Shivagraham (Indonesia)
Sivan temple (Singapore)
Sthūlādri (Thailand)
Temple in the Sea (Trinidad and Tobago)
Tribhuvanamāhesvaram (Cambodia)
Thewasathan Bot Phram (sao ching cha)(Bangkok)
Hx thewalay kestr phiman (Sukhothai Province)
Hx Phar Ishvaran (Kamphaeng Phet  Province)

vteShiva temples in Odisha
Astasambhu, Bhubaneswar
Ajaikapada Bhairava
Akhandalamani
Annakoteshvara
Baneswara Temple, Balasore
Bhuvaneshwar Temple, Boudh
Brahmeswara
Bhimashankar
Chandaneswar
Chateshwar Temple
Dhabaleswar
Gupteswar Cave
Godhaneswar temple
Indralath Temple
Jaleswar
Kapilash
Kapilesvara
Kedareswar
Kosaleswara
Ladoo Baba Temple
Leaning Temple, Huma
Lingaraja
Lokanatha Temple
Markandeshwar Temple
Mukteswar
Murga Mahadeva Shrine
Nilakantheswar Temple
Paikapada shiva temple
Panchalingeshwar
Parsurameswar
Rajarani Temple
Rameshwar Deula
Simhanath Temple
Subarnameru
Yameshwar

Hindu temples in Odisha
Shakti temples in Odisha
Temples in Bhubaneswar





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mukteshvara_Temple,_Bhubaneswar&oldid=1143700384"
Categories: Shiva temples in OdishaHindu temples in BhubaneswarArchaeological monuments in Odisha10th-century Hindu templesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse dmy dates from March 2019Use Indian English from March 2019All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishCoordinates on WikidataCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 9 March 2023, at 10:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





