



Portal:Society - Wikipedia



























Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk
























Portal:Society




53 languages



AlemannischالعربيةАварBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларуская (тарашкевіца)BoarischCatalàCebuanoDeutschދިވެހިބަސްEestiفارسیFrançaisFryskGĩkũyũHausaBahasa IndonesiaעבריתKapampanganქართულიҚазақшаIkinyarwandaKiswahiliLëtzebuergeschMagyarМакедонскиဘာသာ မန်Nederlands日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsРусскийසිංහලSoomaaligaکوردیSuomiTaclḥitTaqbaylitТатарча / tatarçaၽႃႇသႃႇတႆး ТоҷикӣTürkçeاردوייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links











Portal

Talk







English














Read

View source

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadView sourceView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version





















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Wikimedia portal



Portal maintenance status: (February 2020)
This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed.
Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here.

Portal topics
Activities
Culture
Geography
Health
History
Mathematics
Nature
People
Philosophy
Religion
Society
Technology
Random portal


edit The Society Portal
Ant (formicidae) social ethology
A society is a group of individuals involved in persistent social interaction, or a large social group sharing the same spatial or social territory, typically subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions; a given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often exhibits stratification or dominance patterns in subgroups.
Societies construct patterns of behavior by deeming certain actions or concepts as acceptable or unacceptable. These patterns of behavior within a given society are known as societal norms. Societies, and their norms, undergo gradual and perpetual changes.
So far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would otherwise be difficult on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology, and also applied to distinctive subsections of a larger society.
More broadly, and especially within structuralist thought, a society may be illustrated as an economic, social, industrial or cultural infrastructure, made up of, yet distinct from, a varied collection of individuals. In this regard, society can mean the objective relationships people have with the material world and with other people, rather than "other people" beyond the individual and their familiar social environment. (Full article...)


Outline of society
Index



Refresh with new selections below (purge)
edit Selected article

Ketuanan Melayu is the racialist belief that the Malay people are the "tuan" (masters) of Malaysia or Malaya; Malaysian Chinese and Indian Malaysians are considered beholden to the Malays, who have granted them citizenship in return for the Malays' special privileges as set out in Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia. This quid pro quo arrangement is usually referred to as the social contract, not to be confused with the usual idea of a social contract between the government and the people. The most vocal opposition towards the concept has come from non-Malay-based parties, such as the Democratic Action Party. However, the portions of the Constitution related to ketuanan Melayu were "entrenched" after the racial riots of May 13 1969, which followed an election campaign focused on the issue of non-Malay rights. The riots caused a major change in the government's approach to racial issues, and led to the introduction of an aggressive affirmative action policy strongly favouring the Malays, the New Economic Policy. The National Culture Policy, also introduced in 1970, emphasised an assimilation of the non-Malays into the Malay ethnic group. However, during the 1990s Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad rejected this approach, with his Bangsa Malaysia policy emphasising a Malaysian instead of Malay identity for the state. 


More selected articles


More...




edit Featured picture
Credit: Hieronymus Bosch
The Garden of Earthly Delights is a triptych by the early Netherlandish master Hieronymus Bosch. The left panel depicts God presenting Eve to Adam, while the central panel is a broad panorama of sexually engaged nude figures, fantastical animals, oversized fruit and hybrid stone formations. The right panel is a hellscape and portrays the torments of damnation. The intricacy of its symbolism, particularly that of the central panel, has led to a wide range of scholarly interpretations over the centuries.



More selected pictures


Read more




edit Did you know...




... that combat medic David B. Bleak was awarded the Medal of Honor in the Korean War after killing five Chinese soldiers, four using only his hands?
... that Dražen Bogopenec was one of the most powerful people of Hum (pictured)?
... that the Lienzo de Quauhquechollan, produced by Nahua artists in the 1530s, is one of the earliest maps of what is now Guatemala?


More did you know facts



edit Anniversaries this month




1 May 1776 - Foundation of the Bavarian Illuminati, an Enlightenment-era secret society
1 May 1869 - New York Genealogical and Biographical Society elects its first woman member
7 May 1964 - U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) first makes reference to the Great Society
10 May 1793 - Society of Revolutionary Republican Women officially registered at the Paris Commune
More anniversaries...

edit Selected quote






“

It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually.

”


 — Francis Ford Coppola 



More selected quotes


More at Wikiquote 

edit Selected biography


Samuel Adams
Samuel Adams was an American statesman, politician, writer, and political philosopher, and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States. Adams was instrumental in garnering the support of the colonies in rebellion against Great Britain, ultimately resulting in the American Revolution. He was also one of the key architects of the principles of American republicanism that shaped American political culture. Adams organized protests against the British, including the Boston Tea Party in 1773, and participated in the Continental Congress. He also advocated for the adoption of the Declaration of Independence at the Second Continental Congress. Following the American Revolution, Adams helped draft the Articles of Confederation. After the war ended, he ran for the House of Representatives in the 1st United States Congressional election, but was unsuccessful in his bid. He was elected Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts in 1789 and after John Hancock's death in 1793, Adams served as the acting governor, until he was elected governor in January of the following year. He served in that position until June 1797 when he decided to retire from politics. (Full article...)
More selected biographies

edit Featured audio


1913 – Woodrow Wilson's Address to the American Indians

Woodrow Wilson's address on the affairs of American Indians, "The great white father now calls you his brothers". The speech recognised the wrongs of the past and the injustices inflicted on the Native Americans and was a formal apology by Wilson to the Native Americans.




More selected audio


Read more




edit Categories

Society




 Society portal
  Society by continent
 Society by nationality
  Sociology
  Fictional society
  Anti-social behaviour
  Business
  Civil society
  Clubs and societies
  Communication
  Corporate groups
  Crime
  Culture
  Disability
  Economics
  Education
  Social events
  Family
  Feminism and society
 Society in fiction
  Folklore
  Health
  Social history
  Home
  Humans
  Inequality
  Social institutions
  Social issues
  Society-related lists


  Mating systems
  Matronymics
  Medicine in society
  Military
  Society museums
  Nationality
  Organizations
  Patronymics
  People
Category Philosophy and society not found
  Politics
  Postindustrial society
  Private law
  Race and society
  Religion and society
  Rural society
  Science in society
  Sexuality and society
  Social change
  Social media
  Social responsibility
  Social sciences
  Social work
  Socioeconomics
  Technology in society
  Water and society
Category Wikipedia books on society not found
  Society portals




edit Related portals
 Arts Biography Education Freedom of speech Human sexuality Internet Law LGBT Philosophy Psychology Politics Religion Technology Writing


edit Recognized content

Featured articles

 2012 phenomenon
 1689 Boston revolt
 1969 Curaçao uprising
 Digital media use and mental health
 Diocletianic Persecution
 W. E. B. Du Bois
 Female genital mutilation
 First homosexual movement
 From the Doctor to My Son Thomas
 Fuck (film)
 Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties
 Growing Up Absurd
 Homo antecessor
 1981 Irish hunger strike
 Theodora Kroeber
 Solo Man
 Rosewood massacre
 Stonewall riots
 George Washington and slavery

Featured lists

 List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit!

Good articles

 1950s American automobile culture
 Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011
 Agriculture
 Alfred Kroeber: A Personal Configuration
 Algorithmic bias
 America's 60 Families
 Anarchism
 Anarchism in Cuba
 Anonymous (hacker group)
 Anti-nuclear movement in Australia
 Anna Apostolaki
 Archaeoastronomy
 Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication
 The Archives of the Planet
 Aroused (film)
 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka
 Australopithecus africanus
 Australopithecus afarensis
 Australopithecus bahrelghazali
 Australopithecus deyiremeda
 Australopithecus garhi
 Australopithecus sediba
 Balangoda Man
 Before the Dawn (book)
 Birth control
 Black Lives Matter
 Boerehaat
 The Bog People
 Bomis
 Boston Massacre
 Catilinarian conspiracy
 Cueva de las Manos
 Celebrity Studies
 Child prostitution
 History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance
 A Community of Witches
 Compulsory Miseducation
 Criminalization of homosexuality
 Cult film
 Culture of the Song dynasty
 Cutting the Mustard
 Hilda Ellis Davidson
 Demographic history of Scotland
 Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States
 Denisovan
 Deus Ex: Human Revolution
 Diaphoneme
 Diver communications
 Dmanisi hominins
 Double burden
 Dreamtime (book)
 Émile Durkheim
 EST and The Forum in popular culture
 Early European modern humans
 Ely and Littleport riots of 1816
 Extremely online
 Family in the United States
 Feminism
 Feminist economics
 The finger
 Forensic anthropology
 Free Expression Policy Project
 Stephen Fuchs
 Future of Families and Child Wellbeing Study
 Genetically modified organism
 Anca Giurchescu
 God's Choice
 Erving Goffman
 Paul Goodman
 Herto Man
 Historiography of the Crusades
 History of agriculture
 Hitachi Magic Wand
 Winifred Hoernlé
 Homo rudolfensis
 Homo ergaster
 Homo habilis
 Homo heidelbergensis
 Homo longi
 Homo luzonensis
 Homo naledi
 Hooray Henry
 Human
 Human interactions with insects
 I Ching
 Globalization and women in China
 Incel
 Ivatan people
 1968–1969 Japanese university protests
 Java Man
 Jewellery of the Berber cultures
 Joint custody (United States)
 Kenyanthropus
 Kirkbride Plan
 Language
 Lantian Man
 Ralph Larkin
 Lesbian
 Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld
 Bronisław Malinowski
 The Man-Eating Myth
 Man of the Hole
 March for Our Lives Portland
 March for Science Portland
 March of loyalty to martyrs
 Karl Marx
 Josef Mengele
 A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights
 Mork Goes Erk
 Mountain Meadows Massacre
 Myth of the clean Wehrmacht
 Native American mascot controversy
 Neanderthal
 New World Order (conspiracy theory)
 No Lifeguard on Duty
 Not My Presidents Day
 Not in Front of the Children
 Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World
 On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog
 Otaku
 Ovulatory shift hypothesis
 Paranthropus
 Paranthropus aethiopicus
 Paranthropus boisei
 Paranthropus robustus
 Peking Man
 Political party
 Polyethnicity
 Positioning theory
 Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact
 1956 Poznań protests
 Protests in Canada against the Sri Lankan Civil War
 Proto-globalization
 Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear
 Aparna Rao
 A Rape on Campus
 Reborn doll
 Herbert Hope Risley
 The Road to Total Freedom
 Romania in the Early Middle Ages
 Rose Street Club
 Royal intermarriage
 Edward Said
 Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy
 Sheng nu
 Silver
 Simele massacre
 Maria Simon (sociologist)
 Kateryna Skarzhynska
 Slavery in Haiti
 Social identity theory
 Sociology
 Sociology of leisure
 Stay-at-home dad
 Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club
 Tautavel Man
 Team effectiveness
 Tefillin
 Think of the children
 Trance and Dance in Bali
 Truce term
 Max Weber
 Weiquan movement
 Whiskey Rebellion
 Who We Are and How We Got Here
 Benjamin Lee Whorf
 Witch-hunts in India
 Women's March on Portland
 Yuanmou Man
 Florian Znaniecki

Featured pictures




20151030 Syrians and Iraq refugees arrive at Skala Sykamias Lesvos Greece 2






Bertillon, Alphonse, fiche anthropométrique recto-verso






Cicatrices de flagellation sur un esclave






Daisy (1964)






DurbanSign1989






Frances Benjamin Johnston, Self-Portrait (as "New Woman"), 1896






Jane Addams - Bain News Service






Marine da nang






Nanook of the North






SantaCruz-CuevaManos-P2210651b






United States President Barack Obama bends down to allow the son of a White House staff member to touch his head






W.E.B. Du Bois by James E. Purdy, 1907






Xiahe mandible






edit Things you can do






Here are some tasks awaiting attention: 
  Article requests :                           Check article requests in Business and economics topics •  Social sciences topics •   Requested pictures of society topicsAssess :                    Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social scienceCleanup :                                                check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feedCopyedit :                                     Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyeditExpand :                                  Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, PoliticsFeatured article candidates :            Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgentsGood article nominations :                  Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society sectionMaintain :                                          Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articlesStubs :                                                       Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubsVerify :                                            Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability




edit WikiProjects
Related projects



Community
Ethnic groups
Family and relationships
Former countries
Gender Studies
LGBT studies
Literature
Sexology and sexuality
Sociology
Travel and Tourism

What are WikiProjects?

edit Web resources

Definition of Society from the OED.
Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution
"The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did."
BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution
National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities
Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell.


edit Associated Wikimedia


Society on Wikibooks 

Society on Wikimedia Commons

Society on Wikinews 

Society on Wikiquote 

Society on Wikisource 

Society on Wikiversity 

Society on Wiktionary 


Manuals and books

Images and media

News

Quotations

Texts

Learning resources

Definitions



















Discover Wikipedia using portals




List of all portals



The arts portal



Biography portal



Current events portal



Geography portal



History portal



Mathematics portal



Science portal



Society portal



Technology portal



Random portal



WikiProject Portals









Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=1147915925"
Categories: All portalsSociety portalSocietySociety portalsHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portalsWikipedia move-protected portalsPortals with triaged subpages from February 2020All portals with triaged subpagesPortals with no named maintainerRandom portal component with more available subpages than specified maxRandom portal component with 31–40 available subpagesRandom portal component with 31–40 available image subpagesRandom portal component with 16–20 available subpages






 This page was last edited on 3 April 2023, at 00:36 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width




