



Incredible India - Wikipedia




























Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Marketing campaign







2Impact on Indian tourism







3Reception







4See also







5References












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Incredible India




7 languages



فارسیहिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaमराठीРусскийதமிழ்Türkçe
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


International tourism campaign


Incredible IndiaType of projectPublicCountryIndiaKey peopleMinistry of TourismLaunched2002StatusActive
Incredible India (stylized as Incredıble!ndıa) is the name of an international tourism campaign maintained by the Government of India since 2002, to promote tourism in India. The "Incredible India" title was officially branded and promoted since 2002. The exclamation mark forms the 'I' of India. The exclamation used creatively across several visuals compliments the concept behind the word "Incredible".[1][2]


Marketing campaign[edit]
In 1972, Sunil Dutt launched a campaign to promote India as a popular tourist destination.[3] The phrase "Incredible India" was adopted as a slogan by the ministry. Before 2002, the Indian government had regularly formulated policies and prepared pamphlets and brochures for the promotion of tourism, however, it had not supported tourism in a concerted fashion. In 2002, the tourism ministry made a conscious effort to bring in more professionalism in its attempts to promote tourism. It formulated an integrated communication strategy with the aim of promoting India as a destination of choice for the discerning traveller. The tourism ministry engaged the services of advertising and marketing firm Ogilvy & Mather (O&M) India to create a new campaign to increase tourist inflows into the country.[4]
The campaign portrayed India as an attractive tourist destination by showcasing different aspects of Indian culture and history like yoga, spirituality, etc. The campaign was conducted globally and received appreciation from tourism industry observers and travellers alike. However, the campaign also attracted criticism from some quarters. Some observers felt that it had failed to cover several aspects of India which would have been attractive to the average tourist.[5]
In 2008, the Ministry of Tourism launched a campaign targeted at the local population to educate them regarding good behaviour and etiquette when dealing with foreign tourists. Indian actor Aamir Khan was commissioned to endorse the campaign which was titled "Atithidevo Bhava", Sanskrit for "Guests are like God". Atithidevo Bhava was aimed at creating awareness about the effects of tourism and sensitising the local population about preservation of India's heritage, culture, cleanliness and hospitality. It also attempted to instil a sense of responsibility towards tourists and reinforce the confidence of foreign tourists towards India as a preferred holiday destination. The concept was designed to complement the Incredible India campaign.[6]
In 2009, Minister of tourism, Kumari Selja unveiled plans to extend the Incredible India campaign to the domestic tourism sector as well. US$12 million out of a total budget of US$200 million was allocated in 2009 for the purpose of promoting domestic tourism.
In 2015, Aamir Khan, whose comments on perceived intolerance in the country had created a controversy, ceased to be the mascot for the Incredible India campaign when the contract for it expired.[7] The new brand ambassador of Incredible India was Narendra Modi himself.[8]
The veteran actor Amitabh Bachchan and actress Priyanka Chopra were chosen as the new brand ambassadors for the Incredible India campaign.

Impact on Indian tourism[edit]
 Maharajas' Express, a train which travels the famous Indian sites. The train was launched by IRCTC.
According to spending data released by Visa Asia Pacific in March 2006, India has emerged as the fastest growing market in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of international tourist spending. The data revealed that international tourists spent US$372 million in India in the fourth quarter (October–December) of 2005, 25% more than in the fourth quarter of 2004. China, which came second in the region, managed to raise US$784 million from international tourism in Q4 2005, a growth of 23% over its Q4 2004 figures. The tourist spending figures for India would have satisfied the Indian tourism ministry, which had been targeting the high-end market through its long running Incredible India communication campaign.[9]

Reception[edit]
Indian travel industry analysts and tour operators were appreciative of the high standards of the Incredible India campaign. "The promo campaign is making a powerful visual impact and creating a perception of India being a magical place to visit," said Anne Morgaon Scully, President, McCabe Bremer Travel, Virginia, U.S. Average travelers too appeared to find the campaign interesting and informative, going by favourable comments on blogs on travel websites. Although Incredible India was generally well received, industry observers differed in their opinions on the positioning of India in the campaign. G.S.Murari, Director, Fidelis Advertising and Marketing Private Ltd. stated that he was uncomfortable with the tagline "Incredible India" and was of the opinion that since India was not a uni-dimensional country like Singapore or the Maldives, using a word like 'incredible' to describe India as a whole was not appropriate.[10] In 2011, Arjun Sharma, Managing Director, Le Passage to India, stated that the campaign had lived its life and needed to be reinvented.[11]
The Ministry of Tourism again engaged Ogilvy & Mather for a period of three years, starting in 2012, to redefine the brand and provide a strategic vision for the campaign.
In 2013, Incredible India, Ministry of Tourism partnered with WoNoBo.com to launch Walking Tours,[12] an online experience where users navigate and route their way through cities based on a choice of themes.
Parvez Dewan Secretary, Ministry of Tourism launched a personalised itinerary planner called Tripigator,[13][14] a website aimed at providing all travel itineraries in one tab to reduce travellers' efforts. Now currently the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism is Yogendra Tripathi, and Government of India has a portal Travel and Tourism.[15][16]

See also[edit]

India portal
Atithi Devo Bhava
India Shining
Make in India
Stranded in India
Tourism in India
Tourism in Northeast India
References[edit]


^ Sunil, Amitabh Kant (2009). Branding India : an incredible story. Noida: Collins Business, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers India, a joint venture with the India Today Group. ISBN 978-81-7223-809-4.

^ Followers of Incredible India Interest | itimes

^ "Articles - Incredible India Interview". TIMES NEWS NETWORK. 22 March 2005. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 13 March 2011.

^ Webdeveloper. "The 'Incredible India' Campaign: Marketing India to the World | Marketing Case Studies | Business Marketing Management Cases | Case Study". Icmrindia.org. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ Webdeveloper (16 October 2003). "The 'Incredible India' Campaign: Marketing India to the World | Marketing Case Studies | Business Marketing Management Cases | Case Study". Icmrindia.org. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ "domain-b.com : Aamir Khan in Incredible India campaign". 65.175.64.197. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ "Aamir Khan no more 'Incredible India' mascot". ABP Live. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2016.

^ "It's official. Modi to be Incredible India's brand ambassador". India Today. 19 August 2016.

^ Webdeveloper (16 October 2003). "The 'Incredible India' Campaign: Marketing India to the World | Marketing Case Studies | Business Marketing Management Cases | Case Study". Icmrindia.org. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ Webdeveloper. "The 'Incredible India' Campaign: Marketing India to the World | Marketing Case Studies | Business Marketing Management Cases | Case Study". Icmrindia.org. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ "'Incredible India' campaign has run its course: Experts". Deccanherald.com. 22 October 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2011.

^ WoNoBo.com India’s first 360-degree street view launched Archived 2 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine

^ "MoT partners with Worth Your Holidays to launch real-time travel planner, Tripigator.com". Travel Biz Monitor. 6 May 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014.

^ "Tripigator.com Launched in Partnership with Incredible India". Press Information Bureau. Government of India. 7 May 2014.

^ "Travel & Tourism| National Portal of India".

^ "Travel planning portal tripigator.com launched". The Hindu Business Line. The Hindu. 5 May 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014.


vte Tourism in IndiaBy state
Highest points of each state
Andhra Pradesh
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Assam
Bihar
Delhi
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Haryana
Karnataka
Kerala
Ladakh
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Mizoram
Northeast India
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Telangana
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Types
Hindi cinema
International Film Festival of India
Mumbai Film City
Hydrabad Ramoji Film City
Borders of India
Border ceremonies
Border markets
Border crossings
List of extreme points of India
Bridges
Historical bridges
Chenab Rail Bridge
Living root bridges
Longest bridges overall
Longest above water
Diaspora and colonial past
Anglo-Indians
Old China Market, Kolkata
French India
Pondicherry
Karaikal
Yanaon
Mahe
Korean India
Memorial of Heo Hwang-ok
Portuguese India
Goa
Daman and Diu
Tibetan India
Dharamshala
Majnu-ka-tilla
X of India
Switzerland of India
Auli
Barot
Gulmarg
Kausani
Khajjiar
Manipur
Venice of India
Alappuzha
Grand Canyon of India
Gandikota
Niagara Falls of India
Chitrakote Falls
Scotland of India
Coorg
List of festivals in India
Fairs: Melās
Annual rural Olympics of India: Qila Raipur Sports Festival
Festival of ancient LGBT rituals: Koovagam temple festival
Festival of bull running: Jallikattu
Festival of cannabis: Ambubachi Mela, Hola Mohalla, Holi, Maha Shivaratri
Festival of colors: Holi
Festival of colorful: Lathmar Holi
Festival of dance: Garba
Festival of divine knowledge: Gita Mahotsav
Festival of girl child worship: Kanya Puja
Festival of human pyramids: Dahi Handi
Festival of the Indus river: Sindhu Darshan Festival
Festival of kite flying: Uttarayana
Festival of knowledge ad arts worship: Saraswati pouja
Festival of lights: Diwali
Festival of siblings: Raksha Bandhan
Festival of snake boat races: Vallam kali
National festivals: Public holidays in India
World's largest fair with 50 million attendees: Kumbh Mela
Festivals of arts and culture
Delhi Queer Pride Parade
Desert Festival of sand dunes
Rann Utsav
Surajkund International Crafts Mela
Food tourism
Cuisine by states
Tea estate tourism
Munnar
Darjeeling
Kalimpong
Food
Paan
Panipuri
Drinks
Bhang lassi
Desi daru
Indian whisky
Indian beer
Old Monk rum
Kasauli Brewery, the oldest brewery in India
Geological heritage sites
Magnetic hills
Caves of Meghalaya
Ghat Roads
Himalayas
Western Ghats
Tallest mountains
Historical and Archaeological
Archaeological sites
Archaeoastronomical sites
Ashoka pillars
Bhimbetka
Cave temples
Cave paintings
Colossal in situ sculptures
Dolmens
Forts
Fossil
Havelis
India Gate
IVC sites
Menhirs
Monuments
Museums
National heritage sites
Rrock-cut temples
World heritage sites
Stepwells
Nature
Beaches
Caves
Caves of Maharashtra
Coral reefs
Caves of Meghalaya
Hill stations
Highest points of each state

Islands
Floating islands of Loktak Lake
Floating island of Prashar Lake

Lakes
Chilika Lake
Roopkund lake of skeletons
Floating islands of Loktak Lake
Floating island of Prashar Lake

Mountains
Rice terraces of Himalayas
Scenic Ghat roads
Waterfalls

Wildlife
National parks
Protected areas
Sacred groves of India
Largest tree span of the world
Railway
Aerial tramways
Luxury trains
UNESCO Heritage Mountain railways
UNESCO Heritage Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus
Matheran Hill Railway
Indian religions
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Indian religious festivals
Hindu festivals
Buddhist festivals
Jain festivals
Sikh festivals
Pilgrim yatras
Parikrama pilgrim circuits
Pilgrimage sites
Sacred ghats
Sacred girl child as living goddesses
Sacred groves
Sacred mountains
Sacred rivers
Sacred trees
Golden Temple

Varanasi
Akhara
Kashi Vishwanath Temple
Manikarnika Ghat cremation pyres
Naga sadhu
Foreign religions in India

Baháʼí
Baháʼí Faith in India
Lotus Temple
Zoroastrianism
Zoroastrianism in India
Judaism
Bene Ephraim
Bene Israel
Bnei Menashe
Cochin Jews
Desi Jews
Meshuchrarim
Paradesi Jews
Sephardic Jews in India
Novelty
Kargil Maitreya Buddhas
Malana valley
Hindu weddings
Haunted ruined city of Kuldhara
Haunted and wild leopards's den of Bhangarh Fort
Banyan trees
World's highest race
Valley of Flowers
Temple for rats
Ancient Veerabhadra Temple
Specialty
Aerial tramways
Atomic tourism and Pokhran
Ayurvedic tourism
Golden Triangle
Medical tourism
New 7 Wonders
Sex tourism
Yoga tourism
Sport
Royal Enfield biking
Car Rally
Cricket
Mountaineering
Skiing
Great Tibetan Marathon
Ladakh Marathon
Statues
Equestrian
Most famous
Tallest
Tallest structures
Buildings
Structures
Kalisindh Thermal Power Station 202 m
Statue of Unity 182 m
Gopuram 76 m
Tallest towers
Rameswaram TV Tower 323 m
Jaisalmer TV Tower 300 m
Samatra TV Tower 300 m
Pitampura TV Tower 235 m
War memorials
National
Military
Police
Southern Command
Amar Jawan Jyoti
India Gate
Kargil
Organisations
India Tourism Development Corporation
Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation
Assam Tourism Development Corporation
Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation
Gujarat Tourism
Haryana Tourism Corporation
Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Development Corporation
Kerala Tourism Development Corporation
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation
Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation
Odisha Tourism Development Corporation
Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation
Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation
Telangana State Tourism Development Corporation
Uttar Pradesh Tourism
West Bengal Tourism Development Corporation
See also
Incredible India
Atithi Devo Bhava
Namaste
Indianisation
Indosphere
Sanskritisation
Sarva Dharma Sama Bhava
Indian diaspora
Visa policy of India

 Category
 Commons

vteTourism in AsiaSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States withlimited recognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

 Category
 Asia portal





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Incredible_India&oldid=1154234457"
Categories: Tourism in IndiaIndian brandsTourism campaignsAdvertising in IndiaMinistry of Tourism (India)Vajpayee administration2002 establishments in IndiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse Indian English from December 2015All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from December 2015






 This page was last edited on 11 May 2023, at 03:44 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





