



Festivals of Odisha - Wikipedia




























Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Major festivals


				Toggle Major festivals subsection
			




1.1Autumn





1.1.1Durga Puja







1.1.2Kali Puja







1.1.3Kumar Purnima







1.1.4Deepabali









1.2Winter





1.2.1Prathamastami









1.3Spring





1.3.1Vasant Panchami







1.3.2Maha Shivaratri







1.3.3Dola Purnima and Holi









1.4Summer





1.4.1Ratha Yatra









1.5Monsoon





1.5.1Ganesh Chaturthi











2Regional festivals


				Toggle Regional festivals subsection
			




2.1Coastal Odisha





2.1.1Raja Parba







2.1.2Bali Jatra/Kartika Purnima









2.2Central Odisha





2.2.1Gajalaxmi Puja









2.3Western Odisha





2.3.1Nuakhai







2.3.2Sitalasasthi







2.3.3Dhanu Jatra











3References







4External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Festivals of Odisha




5 languages



Igboಕನ್ನಡଓଡ଼ିଆپنجابیاردو
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




This article is part of a series onOdisha
Governance
Governors
Chief Ministers
Legislative Assembly
Political parties
High Court
Police

Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Odia Hindu wedding
Economy
Education
Elections
Festivals
Flora and fauna
Geography
Highest point
History
Historic sites
Maritime history
Rulers
Language
Script
Act
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Odissi (dance)
Odissi music
Politics
Sports
Tourism

Districts  Divisions
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Bhadrak
Boudh
Cuttack
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gajapati
Ganjam
Jagatsinghpur
Jharsuguda
Jajpur
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Koraput
Malkangiri
Mayurbhanj
Nabrangpur
Nayagarh
Nuapada
Puri
Rayagada
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh

GI Products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai Sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri Saree & Fabrics
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili applique work
Sambalpuri saree
Rasgulla

 India portalvte
This article lists the traditional festivals and other cultural events in the Odisha region of India. Odisha celebrates 13 festivals in 12 months as the saying goes Bāra Māsare Tera Parba[1] (transl. Thirteen festivals in twelve months).


Major festivals[edit]
This section lists festivals which are celebrated throughout Odisha.

Autumn[edit]
Durga Puja[edit]
Main article: Durga Puja in Odisha
 A Durga idol in Cuttack with a tarakasi crown.
Durga Puja (ଦୁର୍ଗା ପୂଜା) occurs in the month of Ashvin (October and September). It is a 10-day-long festival. During the period, goddess Durga is worshipped in Shakti peethas or temporary shrines called pandals. Navratri refers to the first nine days of the festival. The nine forms of Durga, Navadurga, are worshipped during these nine days. Navratri begins on the Prathama (first bright day) Paksha (lunar fortnight) of the Ashvin month. It also marks the end of the rainy season according to the traditional calendar. The asura, Mahishasura, was killed by Durga on the tenth day according to Hindu mythology. The final five days are considered especially important.[2]
The Durga Puja of Cuttack is notable for its usage of silver and gold tarakasi (filigree) work on the crown of the idols and also on the pandals. The city Cuttack attracts many tourists during this period of the year. Special trains are run during this time to cater to the rise in tourist traffic.[2] After the worship in Cuttack, on the tenth day of Vijayadashami, the idols are taken out in extravagant processions and are immersed in the Kathajodi river.[3]

Kali Puja[edit]
Kali Puja occurs in the month of Ashvin (October). It is celebrated after Durga Puja ends. It is to commemorate the legendary tale of Goddess Kali dancing in anger and stepping over Lord Shiva & to celebrate the triumph of good over evil. It is considered a big festival in the northern districts of Odisha, such as Kendujhar.[4] In particularly kendujhar district a week long mela goes on during Kali Puja. After the week is over the idol of Goddess Kali is taken on a grand procession and then submerged in a holy river or any water body nearby.[5]

Kumar Purnima[edit]
Main article: Kumar Purnima
Kumar Purnima (କୁମାର ପୂର୍ଣିମା) occurs on the first full moon day of the month of Ashvin. It is primarily celebrated by unmarried girls who pray for a handsome husband. According to the belief, the handsome god Kartikeya also known as Kumar was born on this day. Girls also play traditional games like puchi on this day and wear new clothes .[6]

Deepabali[edit]
Main article: Diwali
Deepabali (ଦୀପାବଳି) is celebrated on Kartik Amavasya.[7]
The families remember their forefathers by burning jute stalks and call upon them for blessing with the Badabadua verse:[8]
Bada badua ho, 
andhara re aasa, 
alua re jaa. 
Mahaprasad khai 
Baaisi pahaacha re gada gadu thaa.
ବଡ଼ ବଡୁଆ ହୋ, 
ଅନ୍ଧାରରେ ଆସ, 
ଆଲୁଅରେ ଯାଅ, 
ମହାପ୍ରସାଦ ଖାଇ 
ବାଇଶି ପାହାଚ ରେ ଗଡ଼ା ଗଡୁଥାଅ।
O forefathers, 
come to us in this dark evening, 
we light your way to heaven. 
Having Mahaprasad, 
May you attain salvation on the 22 steps of the Jagannath temple of Puri.[7]
In some parts of the state, Kali Puja is also celebrated on the same day.[7]

Winter[edit]
Prathamastami[edit]
Main article: Prathamastami
 Enduri Pitha which is prepared on Prathamastami.
On Prathamastami (ପ୍ରଥମାଷ୍ଟମୀ), households pray for the long life of the first borns. Enduri Pitha is a special delicacy which is prepared for this occasion.[9] It has the cultural significance that first born were usually expected to takeover as the family head. It falls on the eighth day of Margasira month.[10]

Spring[edit]
Vasant Panchami[edit]
See also: Vasant Panchami
Vasanta Panchami (ବସନ୍ତ ପଞ୍ଚମୀ) occurs on the fifth day of the first lunar fortnight of Magha month (Magha Shukla Panchami), which usually falls in January or February. It is also observed as Saraswati Puja (ସରସ୍ୱତୀ ପୂଜା). Saraswati is the goddess of knowledge and wisdom in Hinduism. Traditionally, children get their letters on this day. Many educational institutions also observe the festival. It also marks the arrival of spring.[11][12]

Maha Shivaratri[edit]
See also: Maha Shivaratri
 Lingaraja temple
Maha Shivaratri (ମହା ଶିବରାତ୍ରି) is celebrated on the 13th night or 14th day on the waning lunar fortnight in the Phalguna month. It usually falls in February or March. It is considered the night on which Shiva perform the Tandava dance. It is observed by fasting by adherents, especially. Married women pray for the well-being of their spouses. Unmarried women may pray for an ideal husband. Shiva temples are visited on this day and night. Bael fruit and leaves are offered to the god, who is worshiped in the form of a lingam. Worshipers may hold an all-night jagarana and break their fast the next morning.[13]
Shivaratri is celebrated in major Shaivite temples like Lingaraja temple, Kapilash Temple, and Mukteswar temple. Shivaratri is also important to ascetics as Shiva is considered an ascetic god. Ascetics may partake in drinks like Thandai on this day.[13]

Dola Purnima and Holi[edit]
Main article: Dol Jatra, Holi
It also known as Dola Yatra (Odia: ଦୋଳ ଯାତ୍ରା, a five-day long Dola Purnima festival celebrated with pomp and fervor across the state. Followed by Dola Purnima comes Holi. On this day, the Odia calendar becomes ready and is offered to the deity Jagannath, who is also known as "Dolagovinda".[14]
The celebration is mostly celebrated in Villages where Idols of Krishna and Radha come to a common place.

Summer[edit]
Ratha Yatra[edit]
Main article: Ratha Yatra
 Rath Yatra in Puri (2007)
Ratha Yatra (ରଥଯାତ୍ରା) is an annual Hindu festival which originated in Puri in Odisha. The festival is celebrated all over Odisha on the 2nd day of dark fortnight the lunar month of Ashadha (Asadha Sukla Dutiya) usually in June/July. The festival involves transporting of the idols of the deities Jagannatha, Balabhadra and Subhadra on giant chariot from the Jagannath Temple to the Gundicha Temple. The chariots are pulled by devotees with ropes. After nine days, the idols are returned. The 2014 festival in Puri was attended by 900000 people.[15][16]

Monsoon[edit]
Ganesh Chaturthi[edit]
See also: Ganesh Chaturthi
Ganesh Chaturthi (ଗଣେଶ ଚତୁର୍ଥୀ) is celebrated as the birthday of the god Ganesha, usually in August. It is primarily observed by educational institutes and students. The god is offered prasad like modak and laddu in pandals. Students may also offer writing utensils and notebooks, which are used by them after the festival. During the festival, student do not undertake any study related activity. After Ganesh Visarjan, study activities are resumed.[17]

Regional festivals[edit]
This section lists festivals which are specific to a region.

Coastal Odisha[edit]
Raja Parba[edit]
Main article: Raja Parba
Raja Parba (ରଜ ପର୍ବ) is a three-day festival celebrated in the coastal districts in Ashadha month starting with the first day of the month. It usually falls mid-June. This is festival dedicated to Basu-mata, the Earth goddess. During this period, no agricultural activities occur to allow the goddess to rest. The first day is called pahila raja, the second day is proper raja and third day is called basi raja.(Bhuin Na a na/ ଭୂଇଁ ନଅଣ) All the agricultural weapons got Wash and worshipped this day.  Girls play on various types of swings. People exchange pithas among relatives and friends. Raja is also called Mithuna Sankranti. In places it is celebrated for four days and is known as Basumata Puja.[18][19][20]

Bali Jatra/Kartika Purnima[edit]
Main article: Bali Jatra
 The entrance to the 2012 Bali Jatra trade fair in Cuttack.
Bali Jatra (ବାଲି ଯାତ୍ରା) is celebrated to mark the voyages made by ancient sea traders from Odisha to Bali. It falls on the day of Kartik Purnima. On this day, miniatures of the boats called boitas are released in ponds, rivers and the sea. The festival is celebrated for a week all across the state.[21] A major annual trade fair is also held in Cuttack.[22]

Central Odisha[edit]
Gajalaxmi Puja[edit]
The Gaja-Lakshmi Puja (ଗଜଲକ୍ଷ୍ମୀ ପୂଜା) is celebrated primarily in Dhenkanal and Kendrapara town.[1] Archived 21 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine It is an 11-day festival dedicated to Goddess Lakshmi, which begins on Kumar Purnima.[23]

Western Odisha[edit]
Nuakhai[edit]
Main article: Nuakhai
Nuakhai (ନୂଆ ଖାଇ) is particularly celebrated in the Sambalpuri cultural region. It is celebrated to welcome the new paddy (ଧାନ) harvest. It falls on the day after Ganesh Chaturthi. In various regions, priests calculate the tithi and offer the new grains to the local goddesses at an precise auspicious moment. People on this occasional greet each other with the words "Nuakhai Juhar". At evening, folk dance and song events may be organized which are called "Nuakhai Bhetghat".[24]

Sitalasasthi[edit]
Main article: Sitalsasthi
Sitalsasthi is celebrated to observe the marriage of god Shiva and Parvati. One of the devotees acts as the parent of Shiva and another devotee acts as the parent of Parvati. The devotee acting as the father of the god travels to the goddess's house with a bundle of sal tree leaves to make a proposal. After the marriage is fixed, deities of the locality and general public are invited to the ceremony. The general public also financially contributes to the ceremony. Sitalasasthi is also celebrated in many parts of South odisha mainly in Ganjam district and Brahmapur.[25] The marriage ceremony is undertaken on the sixth day of Jyeshtha month. Various artists including eunuchs perform street performances during the festival.[26][27]

 An actor playing king Kansa during Dhanu Jatra
Dhanu Jatra[edit]
Main article: Dhanu Jatra
Dhanu Jatra is a large-scale reenactment of the reign and death of the asura king Kansa which takes place annually in Bargarh. During the period of 1 to 11 January, the town of Bargarh is assumed to be the mythical city of Mathura. The neighboring settlements also take up names from the Mahabharata. The district collector and police superintendent also pretend to be employees of Kansa. The festival begins with the marriage of Vasudeva and Devaki. Ambapalli village is treated as Gopapur. During the festival, an actor pretending to be Kansa issues social messages which are contrary to mythical character.[28][29]

References[edit]


^ "Prathamastami that celebrates firstborns". The Pioneer. 9 December 2020.

^ a b "Durga Puja" (PDF). East Coast Railway. September 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Durga Puja". Government of Odisha. Archived from the original on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Kali in chains at Keonjhar shrine". The Times of India. Retrieved 21 March 2019.

^ "Silver City bids adieu to Goddess Kali". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 21 March 2019.

^ "Kumar Purnima" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ a b c "Deepabali" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 January 2015. Retrieved 17 September 2014.

^ "Thousands chant 'Bada Badua Ho' in Puri". The Pioneer (newspaper). 5 November 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2014.

^ "Oriyas prefer 'Enduri Pitha' on 'Prathamashtami'". The Hindu. 30 November 2010. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Prathamastami" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Vasant Panchami" (PDF). Government of India. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Odisha: Fairs and Festivals". Know India. Government of India. Archived from the original on 23 September 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ a b "Mahashiva Ratri" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Dola Purnima" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Sea of humanity at Puri Rath Yatra". The Hindu. 30 June 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2015.

^ "A glimpse of the Vamana, the dwarf or Lord Jagannath". Government of Odisha. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 24 February 2015.

^ "Ganesh Chaturthi" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Raja Sankranti". Odisha Tourism, Government of Odisha. Retrieved 24 February 2015.

^ "Rain likely to dampen Raja festival spirit". The Hindu. 14 June 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2015.

^ "Raja Sankranti : The Festival of Swings" (PDF). Government of Odisha. June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2015.

^ "Odisha celebrates glorious maritime past". The Hindu. 19 November 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Lakhs turn up for Bali Yatra on opening day". The Hindu. 22 November 2010. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Dhenkanal gears up for Laxmi Puja". The Times of India. 29 October 2012. Retrieved 13 August 2014.

^ "Nuakhai" (PDF). Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Sambalpur in festive mood for Sital Sasthi". The New Indian Express. 10 June 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Rituals start for divine marriage in Sambalpur". The Times of India. 30 May 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Eunuchs put up impressive show". The Times of India. 5 June 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Bargarh gears up for Dhanu Yatra". The Hindu. 23 December 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2014.

^ "Dhanu Yatra gets under way". The Hindu. 1 January 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2014.


Festivvals of Odisha
Maha Shivaratri in Odisha
External links[edit]
vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal
vteCulture of OdishaDanceClassical
Gotipua
Mahari
Odissi
Folk
Bagha Nacha
Chadheia
Chaiti ghoda
Chhau
Chutkuchuta
Dalkhai
Danda Nata
Dhan Koela
Dhuduki
Ghumura
Jhumar
Jodi sankha
Karma
Kandhei nacha
Kathi Kandhei
Keisabadi
Nachni
Naga nrutya
Pala
Rasarkeli
Ranapa
Sambalpuri
Samprada
Laudi nata
Lankapodi
Lila
Tamasa
Pasu nrutya
Patua
Sakhi Nata
Suanga
Tribal
Desia
Gadaba
Kandha
Koya
Onra
Paraja
Saura
Music
Odissi
Khanjani
Kendara
Dhumpa
Play, theatre andpuppetryPlay and theatre
Bharata Lila
Dasakathia
Dhanu Jatra
Jatra
Prahallada Nataka
Puppetry
Ravana chhaya
Sakhi kandhei
Wedding
Odia Hindu wedding
Festivals
Bali Jatra
Boita Bandana
Deepabali
Dola Jatra
Durga Puja
Nuakhai
Gamha Purnima
Kumar Purnima
Makar Sankranti
Manabasa Gurubara
Pana Sankranti (Maha Vishuba Sankranti)
Pousha Purnima
Prathamastami
Ratha Jatra
Raja
Samba Dashami
Savitri Brata
Sitalsasthi
Snana Jatra
Martial arts
Paika akhada
Handlooms
Baleswari bandha
Berhampuri
Bomkai (Sonepuri)
Dhalapathar
Gopalpur Tussar
Habaspuri
Kotpad
Ikat
Pasapali
Sambalpuri
Arts andHandicraftsArts
Pattachitra
Jhoti chita
Saura painting
Idital
Handicrafts
Chandua
Tarakasi
Ganjapa
Clay
Stoneworks
Wooden crafts
Bronze & Bell metal works
Dhokra
Architecture
Kalinga architecture
Deula
Calendar (Panjika)
Odia calendar
Anka year
 Category




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Festivals_of_Odisha&oldid=1139346054"
Categories: Odia cultureOdisha-related listsFestivals in OdishaLists of festivals in IndiaHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2022Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent pageArticles containing Odia-language textWebarchive template wayback links






 This page was last edited on 14 February 2023, at 17:24 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





