



Protected areas of India - Wikipedia




























Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Classification







2National parks







3Wildlife sanctuaries







4Biosphere reserves







5Reserved and protected forests







6Conservation and community reserves







7Village and panchayat Forests







8Private protected areas







9Conservation areas







10See also







11References







12Further reading













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Protected areas of India




7 languages



বাংলাFrançaisहिन्दीItalianoമലയാളംPortuguêsதமிழ்
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from List of protected areas of India)


Wildlife of India
Biodiversity
Flora
Fauna
Lists
Amphibians
Ants
Birds
Butterflies
Fish
Mammals
Molluscs
Moths
Odonates
Tiger beetles
Reptiles
Spiders
Endangered animals

Protected areas
Biosphere reserves
Wildlife sanctuaries
Conservation areas
Private protected areas
Reserved andprotected forests
Conservation andcommunity reserves
Communal forests
Lists
National parks
Ramsar Sites

Conservation
Projects
Tiger
Elephant
Acts of Parliament
Indian Forest Act 1927
Wildlife Protection Act 1972
Wildlife Protection Act 2002

Organisations
National
Ministry of Environmentand Forests
National Biodiversity Authority
Indian Forest Service / Survey
Forest Institute
Wildlife Institute
Tiger Conservation Authority
Zoo Authority
International
Convention on International Tradein Endangered Species (CITES)
International Union forConservation of Nature (IUCN)
South Asian ZooAssociation (SAZARC)
World Association of Zoosand Aquariums (WAZA)
World Society for theProtection of Animals (WSPA)
World Wide Fundfor Nature (WWF)

Related topics
Indian natural history
Environmental issues
Fossil parks
Forestry
Tourism
Lists
Ecoregions
Botanical gardens
Zoological gardens
vte
There are four categories of protected areas in India, constituted under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Tiger reserves consist of areas under national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. There are 53 tiger reserves in India.[1] As of January 2023,[update] the protected areas of India cover 173,629.52 square kilometres (67,038.73 sq mi), roughly 5.28% of the total geographical area of the country.[2]


Classification[edit]
Further information: IUCN protected area categories
India has the following kinds of protected areas, in the sense of the word designated by IUCN:

National parks
Wildlife sanctuaries
Biosphere reserves
Reserved and protected forests
Conservation reserves and community reserves
Private protected areas
Conservation areas
National parks[edit]
Main article: National parks of India
National parks in India are IUCN category II protected areas. India's first national park was established in 1936 as Hailey National Park, now known as Jim Corbett National Park, Uttarakhand. By 1970, India only had five national parks. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger in 1973 to safeguard the habitats of conservation reliant species. As of January 2023,[update] India has 106 national parks covering 44,402.95 square kilometres (17,144.07 sq mi), roughly 1.35% of the total geographical area of the country.[3]

Wildlife sanctuaries[edit]
Main article: Wildlife sanctuaries of India
Wildlife sanctuaries of India are classified as IUCN Category IV protected areas. Between 1936 and 2022, 567 wildlife sanctuaries were established in the country that cover 122,564.86 km2 (47,322.56 sq mi), roughly 3.73% of the geographical area of the country.[4] Among these, the 53 tiger reserves[1] are governed by Project Tiger, and are of special significance for the conservation of the Bengal tiger.

Biosphere reserves[edit]
Main article: Biosphere reserves of India
The Indian government has established 18 biosphere reserves[5] (categories roughly correspondingly to IUCN Category V Protected areas) to protect larger areas of natural habitat than a typical national park or animal sanctuary, and that often include one or more national parks or reserves, along with buffer zones that are open to some economic uses. Protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of the protected region, but also to the human communities who inhabit these regions, and their ways of life.

Reserved and protected forests[edit]
Main article: Reserved forests and protected forests of India
Reserved forests and protected forest (IUCN Category IV or VI, depending on protection accorded): These are forested lands where logging, hunting, grazing and other activities may be permitted on a sustainable basis to members of certain communities. In reserved forests, explicit permission is required for such activities. In protected forests, such activities are allowed unless explicitly prohibited. Thus, in general reserved forests enjoy a higher degree of protection with respect to protected forests.

Conservation and community reserves[edit]
Main article: Conservation reserves and community reserves of India
Conservation reserves and community reserves in India are terms denoting protected areas of India which typically act as buffer zones to or connectors and migration corridors between established national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and reserved and protected forests of India. Such areas are designated as conservation areas if they are uninhabited and completely owned by the Government of India but used for subsistence by communities, and community areas if part of the lands are privately owned. Administration of such reserves would be through local people and local agencies like the gram panchayat, as in the case of communal forests. (See Communal forests of India)

Village and panchayat Forests[edit]
Main article: Communal forests of India
A "Common Important Forest" in India is a forest governed by local communities in a way compatible with sustainable development. Such forests are typically called village forests or panchayat forests, reflecting the fact that the administration and resource use of the forest occurs at the village and panchayat (an elected rural body) levels. Hamlets, villages and communities of villages may actually administer such a forest.[6] Such community forests are usually administered by a locally elected body, usually called the Forest Protection Committee, Village Forest Committee or the Village Forest Institution. Such committees are known as Van Panchayats in the Kumaon Division of Uttarakhand, Forest Co-operative Societies in Himachal Pradesh and Van Samrakshan Samitis in Andhra Pradesh. Legislation pertaining to communal forests vary from state to state, but typically the state government retains some administrative control over matters like staff appointment, and penalization of offenders. Such forests typically conform to the IUCN Category VI Protected Areas, but protection may be enforced by the local communities or the government depending on local legislation.
Maharashtra is the state with the most forest land while Haryana has the least.

Private protected areas[edit]
Main article: Private protected areas of India
Private protected areas of India refer to protected areas inside India whose land rights are owned by an individual or a corporation / organization, and where the habitat and resident species are offered some kind of protection from exploitative activities like hunting, logging, etc. The Government of India did not provide any legal or physical protection to such entities, but in an important amendment introduced by the Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Act of 2002, has agreed to protect communally owned areas of ecological value.

Conservation areas[edit]
Conservation Areas in India refer to well-demarcated large geographical entities with an established conservation plan, and were part of a joint Indo-US project on "landscape management and protection". The project ran from 1996 to 2002. These areas are home to many Conservation reliant species.

See also[edit]
List of zoos in India
List of types of formally designated forests
References[edit]


^ a b "Tiger Reserve List". National Tiger Conservation Authority. 25 March 2023. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023.

^ "National Wildlife Database Cell". Wildlife Institute of India. 4 January 2023. Archived from the original on 30 January 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023.

^ "National Parks, National Wildlife Database Cell". Wildlife Institute of India. 4 January 2023. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023.

^ "Wildlife Sanctuaries, National Wildlife Database Cell". Wildlife Institute of India. 4 January 2023. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023.

^ "Biosphere Reserves in India" (PDF). Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2020.

^ Sinha, Himadri, [https://www.getelectionresult.com Forest and People: Understanding the Institutional Governance, Social Identity, and People's Participation in Indian Forest Management] Archived 2007-06-10 at the Wayback Machine, Presented at "Politics of the Commons: Articulating Development and Strengthening Local Practices", Chiang Mai, Thailand, July 11–14, 2003


Further reading[edit]
"United Nations List of National Parks and Protected Areas: India (1993)". Archived from the original on 25 November 2001. Retrieved 17 November 2005.
Ministry of Forests and Environment Protected Areas website
Ministry of Forests and Environment-Report Ch10 Biodiversity
SPECIES CHECKLIST: Species Diversity in India; ENVIS Centre: Wildlife & Protected Areas (Secondary Database); Wildlife Institute of India (WII)
ENVIS Centre: Wildlife & Protected Areas (Secondary Database); Wildlife Institute of India (WII)
vteGeography of IndiaGeology
Fossil Parks
Geology of India
Indian Plate
Heritage
National Geological Monuments of India
Sacred groves of India
Sacred mountains of India
Sacred rivers of India
Stones of India
Landforms
Beaches
Borders
Canals
Desert
ECZ
Extreme points
Glaciers
Highest point by states
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Mountain passes
Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls
Plains
Indo-Gangetic
Eastern Coastal
Western Coastal
Regions
North India
Northeast India
East India
South India
West India
Central India
Subdivisions
States and territories
Autonomous areas
Divisions
Districts
Cities
Towns
Municipalities
Environment and climate
Biogeographic classification
Ecoregions
Biospheres
Fauna
Flora
Forests
Issues
Protected Areas
Wildlife
See also
National monuments of India
National parks of India
Nature worship in Indian-origin religions
World Heritage Sites in India
Climate of India
Culture of India
Environment of India
History of India
Tourism in India

vteProtected areas of AsiaSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States withlimited recognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

 Category
 Asia portal





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Protected_areas_of_India&oldid=1147387759"
Categories: Protected areas of IndiaWildlife sanctuaries in MaharashtraTourist attractions in MaharashtraHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from March 2016Use Indian English from March 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles containing potentially dated statements from January 2023All articles containing potentially dated statements






 This page was last edited on 30 March 2023, at 16:35 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





