



Buddhist pilgrimage sites in India - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Places associated with the life of Buddha


				Toggle Places associated with the life of Buddha subsection
			




1.1Primary sites







1.2Places visited by Buddha for discourse









2Other prominent historic Buddhist sites by state


				Toggle Other prominent historic Buddhist sites by state subsection
			




2.1Andhra Pradesh







2.2Assam







2.3Bihar







2.4Goa







2.5Gujarat







2.6Haryana







2.7Jammu and Kashmir







2.8Madhya Pradesh







2.9Maharashtra







2.10Odisha







2.11Telangana







2.12Tripura







2.13Uttar Pradesh









3Tibetan Buddhist sites


				Toggle Tibetan Buddhist sites subsection
			




3.1By state







3.2Sikkim









4See also







5References







6External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Buddhist pilgrimage sites in India




1 language



Shqip
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


 "Great Buddha Statue" at Bodh Gaya
In religion and spirituality, a pilgrimage is a long journey or search of great moral significance. Sometimes, it is a journey to a sacred place or to a shrine of importance to a person's beliefs and faith. Members of every major religion participate in pilgrimages. A person who makes such a journey is called a pilgrim.
There are number of historical Buddhist pilgrimage sites in the Republic of India.


Places associated with the life of Buddha[edit]
Primary sites[edit]
Pilgrimage toBuddha's Holy Sites
The Four Main Sites
Bodh Gaya
Kushinagar
Lumbini
Sarnath

Four Additional Sites
Rajgir
Sankissa
Shravasti
Vaishali

Other Sites
Ajanta Caves
Amaravati
Barabar Caves
Bharhut
Chandavaram
Devdaha
Ellora Caves
Kapilavastu
Kesaria Stupa
Kosambi
Lalitgiri
Mathura
Nalanda
Nasik Caves
Pataliputra
Pāvā
Piprahwa
Pushpagiri
Ramagrama stupa
Ratnagiri
Sanchi
Udayagiri
Tilaurakot
Varanasi
Vikramashila
vte
Buddhism offers four primary sites of pilgrimage: Lumbini (birthplace of the Buddha), Bodh Gaya (the site where the Buddha attained enlightenment), Sarnath (the location of the Buddha’s first sermon), and Kushinagar (the location where the Buddha attained parinirvana). All of these sites are located in India except Lumbini, which is located in southern Nepal.





"Maha Bodhi Temple" at Bodh Gaya






Dhamek Stupa, Sarnath






Ancient Buddhist Monastery at Sarnath






Parinirvana Stupa at Kushinagar






Remains of ancient stupas in Kushinagar




Places visited by Buddha for discourse[edit]
Andhra Pradesh:
Nagarjunakonda in Guntur district: Seat of Mahayana
Thotlakonda and Bojjannakonda in Visakhapatnam
Bihar: The name of Bihar is derived from vihara, meaning monastery, such was the association of the area with Buddhism. In addition to these sites which were visited by the Buddha, other sites in India have become notable:
Patna,  — Formerly known as Pataliputra, it was the seat of the Mauryan empire and a significant Buddhist centre
Rajgir, Bihar — Formerly known as Rajagaha, it was the capital of Magadha, ruled by King Bimbisara, one of the most prominent monarchs and supporters during the lifetime of the Buddha
Nalanda, Bihar — Site of an ancient Buddhist university, destroyed by Bakhtiyar Khalji during Islamic attacks
Sravasti, Uttar Pradesh — Formerly known as Savatthi, it was the capital of Kosala, ruled by King Pasenadi, one of the most prominent monarchs and supporters during the lifetime of the Buddha
Vaishali, Bihar — Seat of a republican state of the Lichchavis, prominent supporters of the Buddha. Site of the Second Buddhist Council
Haryana: Sacred places in the order of travel by Buddha, where he gave several important discourses documented in the Pali texts. After visiting Mathura, he travelled along Grand Trunk Road in Haryana (also see Buddhist pilgrimage sites in Haryana).
From Mathura in Uttar Pradesh, Buddha travelled along Grand Trunk Road in Haryana (also see Buddhist pilgrimage sites in Haryana).
Kamashpura Aastha Pugdal Pagoda (Kumashpur) in Sonipat city, the place where Buddha gave Mahasatipatthana sutta),.[1][2]
Kurukshetra Stupa on the banks of sacred Brahma Sarovar in Kurukshetra city
Topra between Kurukshetra and Yamunanagar, now has a large open air museum park housing several replica of Ashoka's edicts including largest Ashoka Chakra in the world
Srughna, now known as the Sugh Ancient Mound, on outskirts of Yamunanagar city
Chaneti Stupa, on outskirts of Yamunanagar city
Other prominent historic Buddhist sites by state[edit]
All are the historic ancient sites of learning, and the list includes very few relatively new sites which have been specifically highlighted accordingly. Most of these sites have association with Ashoka and other Buddhist kings.

Andhra Pradesh[edit]
Amaravati
Bavikonda
Bojjannakonda
Bhattiprolu
Chandavaram
Dharanikota
Ghantasala
Gudivada
Guntupalli
Jaggayyapeta
Nagarjunakonda
Pavurallakonda museum[3]
Ramatheertham
Salihundam
Thotlakonda
Undavalli Caves
Visakhapatnam
Assam[edit]
Namphake in Dibrugarh
Surya Pahar in Goalpara
Hayagriva Madhava at Hajo
Bihar[edit]
Kesaria stupa
Krimila
Nalanda
Odantapuri
Saptaparni Cave
Sujata Stupa
Vaishali
Vikramshila[4]
Vulture Peak
Goa[edit]
Lamgao caves
Rivona caves
Gujarat[edit]
Vadnagar in Mehsana district[5]
Haryana[edit]
In 2021, it was announced that Buddha Haryana circuit will be developed by the Centre for yatra (pilgrimage).[6]
Also see above the "places visited by Buddha for discourse" which has additional sites in Haryana.

Adi Badri, Haryana[7]
Mounds: Agroha Mound, Sugh Ancient Mound
Pillars of Ashoka: (Hisar, Fatehabad Ashokan Pillar,[8] Topra Kalan Edicts Museum)
Jammu and Kashmir[edit]
Harwan, near Mughal Shalimar Garden, dating from the fifth century
Parihaspore, 20 km northeast of Srinagar
Panderathan, near Srinagar
Madhya Pradesh[edit]
Bagh Caves
Sanchi, site of a large stupa built by Ashoka which also houses the relics of Sariputra and Mahamoggallana, the two chief disciples of the Buddha; reputedly the place from which Mahinda set out to proselytise Sri Lanka.
Maharashtra[edit]
Ajanta, site of intricate Buddhist cave paintings depicting Buddhism
karla caves site of intricate Buddhist cave paintings
Ellora, site of intricate Buddhist cave paintings
Deekshabhoomi, a new 20th century site associated with Dr. Bhimrao  Ambedkar[9]
Odisha[edit]
Lalitgiri
Ratnagiri
Udayagiri
Telangana[edit]
Nelakondapalli,[3]
Phanigiri
Tripura[edit]
Pilak, an archaeological site in the Santirbazar sub-division of South Tripura district
Uttar Pradesh[edit]
Kosambi
Mathura
Pāvā (Fazilnagar)
Piprahwa
Tibetan Buddhist sites[edit]
By state[edit]
Arunachal Pradesh: Tawang
Sikkim: Dubdi Monastery, Enchey Monastery, Pemayangtse Monastery, Ralang Monastery, Rumtek, Tashiding Monastery, Tawang Monastery, Zang Dhok Palri Phodang
Himachal Pradesh:
Dharamsala,
McLeod Ganj at Dharamsala, the primary seat of current Dalai Lama
Palpung Sherabling Monastery at Baijnath
Tabo Monastery, Spiti Valley, Himachal Pradesh
Karnataka: Namdroling Monastery in Bylakuppe near Mysore
Ladakh: Leh
Sikkim[edit]
Dubdi Monastery, occasionally called 'Yuksom Monastery' is a Buddhist monastery of the Nyingma sect of Tibetan Buddhism near Yuksom, in the Geyzing subdivision of West Sikkim district.[10][11]
Enchey Monastery is located in Gangtok, the capital city of Sikkim in the Northeastern Indian state. It belongs to the Nyingma order of Vajrayana Buddhism.
Pemayangtse Monastery is a Buddhist monastery in Pemayangtse, near Pelling in the northeastern Indian state of Sikkim, located 140 kilometres (87 mi) west of Gangtok.[12]
Ralang Monastery is a Buddhist monastery of the Kagyu sect of Tibetan Buddhism in southern Sikkim, northeastern India. It is located six kilometres from Ravangla.[13]
Rumtek Monastery also called the "Dharmachakra Centre", is a gompa located in the Indian state of Sikkim near the capital Gangtok. It is a focal point for the sectarian tensions within the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism that characterize the Karmapa controversy.
Tashiding Monastery is a Buddhist monastery of the Nyingma sect of Tibetan Buddhism in Western Sikkim, northeastern India. It is located on top of the hill rising between the Rathong chu and the Rangeet River.
Tawang Monastery in the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh is the largest monastery in India and second largest in the world after the Potala Palace in Lhasa, Tibet.
Zang Dhok Palri Phodang is a Buddhist monastery in Kalimpong in West Bengal, India. The monastery is located atop Durpin Hill, one of the two hills of the town. It was consecrated in 1976 by the visiting Dalai Lama.




The Manadala at the "Kakaling", the entry gate to the Tawang Monastery.






Pemayangtse Monastery.






The Zang Dhok Palri Phodang monastery atop Durpin Hill.






Prayer Wheels in the Rumtek Monastery.






Ornately carved colourful Window of Enchey Monastery.






Dubdi Monastery.






The Golden Chorten near Tashiding Monastery.






Ralang Monastery.




 Rumtek Monastery, Sikkim, India.
See also[edit]

India portalReligion portalSociety portal
Buddhist pilgrimage
Buddhist pilgrimage sites in Nepal
Shikoku Pilgrimage, Eighty-eight Temples pilgrimage in the Shikoku island, Japan
Japan 100 Kannon Pilgrimage, pilgrimage circuit that is composed of three independent pilgrimages (Saigoku, Bandō and Chichibu) in Japan
References[edit]


^ Dhamma patthana, dhamma.org.

^ Aastha Pugdal Pagoda at Kumaspur (Kamas Nigam in Sonepat, SDBST.

^ a b "Dept. Of Archaeology & Museums". Archived from the original on 2012-02-09. Retrieved 2012-10-24.

^ "Top Buddhist Sites In India To Visit".

^ New Buddha site found in Gujarat

^ Cleanliness of tiraths a challenge in Haryana, Hindustan Times, 27 July 2021.

^ "Haryana misses the Buddha moment : The Tribune | the Buddhist Forum". Archived from the original on 2017-06-28. Retrieved 2017-07-09.

^ Lat of Feroz Shah

^ Lelyveld, Joseph (2011). Great soul Mahatma Gandhi and his struggle with India (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 210. ISBN 978-0307595362. Dhamma Chakra Pravartan Din.

^ "Monasteries". sikkiminfo.in. Archived from the original on February 13, 2010. Retrieved November 21, 2009.

^ "Monasteries in Sikkim are of three types". Dubdi Monastery. Sikkim Info. Retrieved 2010-05-05.

^ "Pemayangtse Monastery". Buddhist Tourism. Retrieved November 7, 2009.

^ "Ralang Monastery". Buddhist-temples.com. Retrieved November 21, 2009.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Buddhist pilgrimage sites in India.

External links[edit]
Web
Buddhist pilgrimage sites in India
Pilgrims Guide to Buddhist India: Buddhist Sites
Videos

Youtube: Lord Buddha & Buddhist Pilgrimage Sites in India —A Documentary in Hindi




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buddhist_pilgrimage_sites_in_India&oldid=1123414794"
Categories: Buddhist pilgrimage sites in IndiaBuddhism in IndiaBuddhist buildings in IndiaPilgrimage in IndiaLists of pilgrimage sites in IndiaIndia religion-related listsHidden category: Commons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 23 November 2022, at 16:30 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





