



Coral reefs in India - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Research and Institutions







2Laws and regulations







3List of Coral reefs







4Gallery







5See also







6References







7Further reading












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Coral reefs in India




2 languages



Македонскиதமிழ்
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




 Coral Reef at the Andaman Islands.
 Feather star coral reef in Lakshadweep atolls.
Coral reefs in India are one of the most ancient and dynamic ecosystems of India. The coral reefs not only provide a sanctuary to a myriad of marine life but also play a key role in protecting the coastline from erosion. India has about 7517 km of coastline including islands but mainland coast is 6100 km.
The Coral reefs in India are mainly restricted to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Gulf of Mannar, Gulf of Kutch, Palk Strait and the Lakshadweep islands. All of these reefs are Fringing reefs, except Lakshadweep which are Atolls. There are Patchy corals present along the inter-tidal areas of the central west coast like the intertidal regions of Ratnagiri, Gaveshani Bank etc. The Hermatypic corals are also present along the sea shore  from Kollam in Kerala to Enayam Puthenthurai in Tamilnadu.[1]


Research and Institutions[edit]
The Major Institutions in India involved in the management, monitoring and research on Coral reefs are the Ministry of Earth Sciences, the Zoological Survey of India, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Madurai Kamaraj University, Annamalai University, National Centre for Earth Science Studies, National Institute of Ocean Technology, National Institute of Oceanography, India etc.[1]
The Space Applications Centre in Ahmedabad is involved in the data collection of areas under Coral reefs using remote sensing.[1]

Laws and regulations[edit]
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change manages and guidelines for the protection of the Coral reefs in India. If the Coral reef region is under a protected area then it comes under the jurisdiction of the State Wild life department.[1]
The Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) notification of 1991 gives protection to all marine resources. All types of coral reefs are protected under the CRZ1 category. Its Section 7 (2) prohibits the construction of beach resorts or hotels on coral reefs. In Certain States, the quarrying and collecting of massive corals are banned except for scientific purposes.[1]

List of Coral reefs[edit]
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Situated in the Bay of Bengal, exclusively fringing reefs of about 572 islands, most of these islands have a healthy biodiversity.[2]
Eastern Coast
There is a coral reef near the sea between Chandrabhaga coast and Ramachandi in the Konark area of Odisha.

Gulf of Mannar
Fringing reefs with a chain of 21 islands from Rameswaram in the north to Thoothukudi (Tuticorin) in the south. This part of the gulf forms part of the Gulf of Mannar biosphere reserve.[3]
Gulf of Kutch
Exclusively consists of fringing reefs. The reefs are relatively less developed due to large range of temperature and high salinity. The harbours have less biodiversity. The entire Gulf of Kutch is also known as a marine national park.[4]
Lakshadweep
Exclusively coral atolls with 36 islands, of which 10 are inhabited. The islands range from less than 1 km (0.62 mi) to about 9 km (5.6 mi) in length, and do not exceed 2 km (1.2 mi) in width.[5]
Western Coast
There are some coral reefs around small inlets in the western part of the Gulf of Khambat. Angria Bank is a coral reef off Vijaydurg in Maharashtra. Tarkarli in Malwan, Maharashtra is a smaller reef. There is a coral reef in Netrani Island in Karnataka.
Gallery[edit]




Gulf of Kutch on the left; image by NASA Earth Observatory






Gulf of Mannar






Scene at Lakshadweep Island






North Sentinel Island is an island in the group of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.




See also[edit]

India portalGeography portal
Coastal India
Fishing in India
Central Indian Ridge
Southeast Indian Ridge
Southwest Indian Ridge
Rodrigues Triple Junction
Shiva crater
Tourism in India
List of islands in India
List of beaches in India
References[edit]


^ a b c d e Vineeta Hoon. "Coral Reefs of India: Review of Their Extent, Condition, Research and Management Status by Vineeta Hoon". Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved 4 August 2020.

^ Planning Commission of India (2008). Andaman and Nicobar Islands Development Report. State Development Report series (illustrated ed.). Academic Foundation. ISBN 978-81-7188-652-4. Retrieved 3 November 2014.

^ UNDP (1994). "Conservation and Sustainable-use of the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve's Coastal Biodiversity" (PDF). UNDP, Project Brief, New York. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2014.

^ Apte, Deepak. "Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutchh: A conservation challenge" (PDF). Bombay Natural History Society: 26–27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2014. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ "Location, Area and Population". lakshadweep.nic.in. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 3 November 2014.


Further reading[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coral reefs in India.

Coral Reefs in India – National Biodiversity Authority of India
Official website – National Institute of Oceanography


This India-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vtevteCorals and coral reefsStony corals
Blue
Brain
Elegance
Elkhorn
Hermatypic
Chalice
Pillar
Staghorn
Table
Soft corals
Bamboo
Black
Organ pipe
Sea fans
Sea pens
Coral reefs
Atoll
Cay
Coral
Deep-water coral
mesophotic coral reef
Fringing
Microatoll
Coral reef fish
Census of Coral Reefs
The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs
Catlin Seaview Survey
Spur and groove formation
Coral regions
List of reefs
Coral in non-tropical regions
African coral reefs
Amazon Reef
Andros, Bahamas
Belize Barrier Reef
Coral Sea Islands
Coral Triangle
East African coral coast
Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary
Great Barrier Reef
India
Jamaica
Kiribati
Maldives
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System
Ningaloo Reef
New Caledonia barrier reef
Pulley Ridge
Raja Ampat Islands
Red Sea
Lakshadweep
Solomon Archipelago
Southeast Asian coral reefs
Tuvalu Archipelago
Virgin Islands
Coral diseases
Coral bleaching
Black band disease
Skeletal eroding band
Stony coral tissue loss disease
White band disease
White pox disease
Conservation
Environmental issues with coral reefs
Coral reef protection
Coral reef restoration
Reef resilience
Organizations
Coral Reef Alliance
Green Fins
International Coral Reef Society
Project AWARE
Reef Check
Reef Ball

Symbiotic algae
Zooxanthellae
Amphidinium
Symbiodinium
Other
Artificial reef
Aquaculture of coral
Coral dermatitis
Precious coral
Coral rag
Coral sand
Coralline algae
Deep-water coral
Fire coral
Rugosa (extinct)
Tabulata





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coral_reefs_in_India&oldid=1141106598"
Categories: Coral reefsReefs of IndiaIndia geography-related listsIndia stubsHidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodicalUse dmy dates from July 2019Commons category link is on WikidataAll stub articles






 This page was last edited on 23 February 2023, at 11:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





