



Odissi music - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History


				Toggle History subsection
			




1.1Ritual music of Jagannatha Temple







1.2Prehistoric music







1.3Kharabela & Ancient Caves







1.4Sculpture







1.5Natya Shastra of Bharata Muni









2Tradition


				Toggle Tradition subsection
			




2.1Charyapada and Buddhist Music







2.2Jayadeva and Gita Govinda





2.2.1Gopala Nayaka









2.3British rule









3Treatises







4Characteristics


				Toggle Characteristics subsection
			




4.1Mardala





4.1.1As a solo instrument









4.2Ensemble









5Relation with other classical music







6Odissi music in modern times


				Toggle Odissi music in modern times subsection
			




6.1Classicality









7Exponents


				Toggle Exponents subsection
			




7.1Gurus of Odissi Mardala









8See also







9References







10External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Odissi music




5 languages



বাংলাFrançaisଓଡ଼ିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀதமிழ்
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Genre of Indian classical music
Not to be confused with the Odissi dance.
Oṛiśī SangītaOdissi musicMahāprabhu Jagannātha
Composers
Jayadeva
Dinakrusna
Bhanja
Banamali
Abhimanyu
Kabisurjya
Gopalakrusna

Shāstras
Sangita Sara
Gita Prakasa
Sangita Narayana
Sangita Muktabali

Compositions
Gita Govinda
Odissi Prabandha
Chhanda
Champu
Chautisa
Janana
Bhajana
Malasri
Pallabi
Charjyapada

Instruments
Mardala
Benu
Bina
Khol
vte
Indian classical music
Ancient Tamil music
Carnatic music
Hindustani music
Odissi music

Concepts
Shruti
Svara
Alankara
Raga
Rasa
Tala
Sangita
Vadya
vte
Odissi music (Odia: ଓଡ଼ିଶୀ ସଙ୍ଗୀତ, romanized: oṛiśī sangīta) is a genre of classical music in India, originated from the eastern state of Odisha. The traditional ritual music for the service of Lord Jagannatha, Odissi music has a history spanning over two thousand years, authentic sangita-shastras or treatises, unique Ragas & Talas and a distinctive style of rendition.[1][2]
The various aspects of Odissi music include odissi prabandha, chaupadi, chhānda, champu, chautisa, janāna, mālasri, bhajana, sarimāna, jhulā, kuduka, koili, poi, boli, and more. Presentation dynamics are roughly classified into four: raganga, bhabanga, natyanga and dhrubapadanga. Some great composer-poets of the Odissi tradition are the 12th-century poet Jayadeva, Balarama Dasa, Atibadi Jagannatha Dasa, Dinakrusna Dasa, Kabi Samrata Upendra Bhanja, Banamali Dasa, Kabisurjya Baladeba Ratha,Abhimanyu Samanta Singhara and Kabikalahansa Gopalakrusna Pattanayaka.[3]
According to Bharata Muni's Natya Shastra, Indian classical music has four significant branches: Avanti, Panchali, Odramagadhi and Dakshinatya. Of these, Odramagadhi exists in the form of Odissi music. Odissi music crystallised as an independent style during the time of the early medieval Odia poet Jayadeva, who composed lyrics meant to be sung, set to ragas and talas unique to the local tradition.[4] However, Odissi songs were written even before the Odia language developed. Odissi music has a rich legacy dating back to the 2nd century BCE, when king Kharavela, the ruler of Odisha (Kalinga), patronized this music and dance.[5]
The traditional artforms of Odisha such as Mahari, Gotipua, Prahallada Nataka, Radha Prema Lila, Pala, Dasakathia, Bharata Lila, Khanjani Bhajana, etc. are all based on Odissi music. Odissi is one of the classical dances of India from the state of Odisha; it is performed with Odissi music.[6]


History[edit]
Ritual music of Jagannatha Temple[edit]
Odissi music is intimately and inextricably associated with the Jagannatha temple of Puri. The deity of Jagannatha is at the heart of Odisha's culture, and Odissi music was originally the music offered as a sevā or service to Jagannatha. Every night during the Badasinghara or the last ritual of the deity, the Gitagovinda of Jayadeva is sung, set to traditional Odissi ragas & talas. This tradition has continued unbroken since the time of Jayadeva, who himself used to sing in the temple. After the time of the poet, the singing of the Gitagovinda according to the authentic Odissi ragas & talas was instated as a mandatory sevā at the temple, to be performed by the Maharis or Devadasis, systematically recorded in inscriptions, the Mādalā Pānji and other official documents that describe the functioning of the temple. To this date, the Jagannatha temple remains the fountainhead of Odissi music and the most ancient & authentic compositions (including a few archaic Odia chhandas and jananas by Jayadeva himself) survive in the temple tradition, although the Devadasis are no more found owing to their systematic eradication by the British government.  Bars discovered from Sankarjang, Angul, Odisha
Prehistoric music[edit]
Ancient Odisha had a rich culture of music, which is substantiated by many archaeological excavation throughout Odisha. At Sankarjang in the Angul district, the initial spade work exposed the cultural stratum of the Chalcolithic period (400 BC onward). From here, polished stone celts and hand-made pottery have been excavated. Some of the Celts are narrow but large in size. Thus they are described as Bar-celts. On the basis of bar-celts discovered in Sankarjung it could be argued that they were an earlier musical instrument in India. Scholars have referred to these as the earliest discovered musical instruments of South East Asia.[7]

Kharabela & Ancient Caves[edit]
There are vivid sculptures of musical instruments, singing and dancing postures of damsels in the Ranigumpha Caves in Khandagiri and Udayagiri at Bhubaneswar. These caves were built during the reign of the Jain ruler Kharabela of Kalinga in the 2nd century BC.[1] In inscriptions, Kharabela has been described as an expert in classical music (gandhaba-beda budho) and a great patron of music (nata-gita-badita sandasanahi).[8] Madanlal Vyas describes him as an expert who had organized a music programme where sixty four instruments were played in tandem. Kharabela was an emperor of the Chedi dynasty. Chedi was the son of Kousika, a Raga that is said to have been created by sage Kasyapa according to Naradiya Sikhya. The ancient musicologists of Odisha, like Harichandana belonged to the Naradiya school. The Raga Kousika is an extremely popular raga in the Odissi tradition, even until date.[1]

One of the caves of Udayagiri is known as the Bajaghara Gumpha, literally meaning 'hall of musical instruments'. It is designed such that any musical recital inside is amplified by the acoustics of the cave.[8] Rani Gumpha at Udayagiri caves, designed as an auditorium with a stage in the center for performances
Sculpture[edit]
In the temples of Odisha, oldest among them dating to the 6th century AD, such as Parasuramesvara, Muktesvara, Lingaraja and Konarka, there are hundreds of sculptures depicting musical performances and dancing postures.

Natya Shastra of Bharata Muni[edit]
Bharata's Natya Shastra is the most respected ancient treatise on Indian music & dance. Bharata in his seminal work has mentioned four different 'pravrittis' of natya (which includes both music & dance). The classification into pravrittis can be roughly said to be a stylistic classification, based on unique features of the regional styles that were distinctive enough in Bharata's time. The four pravrittis mentioned are Avanti, Dakshinatya, Panchali and Odramagadhi (or Udramagadhi). 'Odra' is an ancient name of Odisha. Parts of ancient Kalinga, Kangoda, Dakhina Kosala, Tosali, Matsya Desa, Udra now constitute the state of Odisha. The classical music that prevailed in these regions was known as Udramagadhi. The post-Jayadeva text Sangita Ratnakara also makes a reference to the same. In the present times, it is this very system that goes under the rubric Odissi music.[1][8]

Tradition[edit]
 Image of Buddha inside a room of the Lalitagiri monastery, Jajpur
Charyapada and Buddhist Music[edit]
For a long period Buddhism was the major religion of Odisha. The Vajrayana and Sahajayana branches of Buddhism were particularly influential, and scholars opine that Odisha or Oddiyana was the birth place of Vajrayana itself. Between the seventh and eleventh centuries, the Charya Gitika of Buddhist Mahasiddhas or Siddhacharyas were written and composed. Many of the Mahasiddhas were born in Odisha and wrote in a language that is extremely close to present-day Odia. Some of these songs were ritually sung on the ratha of Jagannatha during the Ratha Jatra.[1]
The Charyapadas or Charya songs usually consist of five or six padas. The last pada bears the name of the poet. The ragas to sing them have been indicated by the authors themselves, but no mention of tala is found. The ragas used by the Mahasiddhas continued to be popular in Odissi music for centuries afterwards, and remain important to this day. Many of the raga names as written bear significant resemblance with the raga nomenclature of Odisha & the pronunciations of raga names in the Odissi tradition, such as the mention of Baradi and not Varali. Some of the ragas mentioned in the Charyapadas are :





Raga name as mentioned in the Charyapadas

Present-day raga name in Odissi music


Aru




Bangāla

Bangāla


Barādī

Barādī


Bhairabī

Bhairabī


Debakrī

Debakirī


Deśākha

Deśākhya


Dhanāśrī

Dhanāśrī


Gabadā

Gaudā


Gunjarī

Gujjarī


Kāhnu Gunjarī




Kāmoda

Kāmoda


Mallārī




Mālasī

Mālaśrī


Mālasī Gabudā

Mālaśrī Gaudā


Rāmakrī

Rāmakerī


Śābarī

Śābarī

Jayadeva and Gita Govinda[edit]
 Palm leaf manuscript (pothi) of Gita Govinda written by iconic medieval Odissi poet Gopalakrusna Pattanayaka of Paralakhemundi
The Gitagovinda written by 12th-century poet Jayadeva is known to be one of the earliest, if not the earliest Indian song where the author has indicated with precision the exact raga and tala (mode of singing and the rhythm) of each song. This makes it one of the earliest texts of Indian classical music. Many of the ragas indicated in the Gitagovinda continue to be highly popular in Odissi music even now, and some of the talas mentioned in it are exclusive to the tradition of Odissi music.[8]
These indications have been compiled below according to the ashtapadi number, based on the important ancient copies of the Gita Govinda and its commentaries such as Sarvangasundari Tika of Narayana Dasa (14th century), Dharanidhara's Tika (16th century), Jagannatha Mishra's Tika (16th century), Rasikapriya of Rana Kumbha (16th century) and Arthagobinda of Bajuri Dasa (17th century).[9]

Mālava, Mālavagauḍa or Mālavagauḍā
Maṅgala Gujjarī or Gurjarī
Basanta
Rāmakirī or Rāmakerī
Gujjarī or Gurjarī
Guṇḍakirī or Guṇḍakerī or Mālavagauḍa
Gujjarī or Gurjarī
Karṇṇāṭa
Deśākhya or Deśākṣa
Deśī Barāḍi or Deśa Barāḍi or Pañchama Barāḍi
Gujjarī or Gurjarī
Guṇḍakirī or Guṇḍakerī
Mālava or Mālavagauḍā
Basanta
Gujjarī or Gurjarī
Barāḍi or Deśa Barāḍi or Deśī Barāḍi
Bhairabī
Gujjarī or Gurjarī or Rāmakerī
Deśī or Deśa Barāḍi
Basanta
Barāḍi or Deśa Barāḍi
Barāḍi
Rāmakirī or Rāmakerī or Bibhāsa
Rāmakirī or Rāmakerī
Most of the ragas and talas indicated by Jayadeva, with the exception of one or two, continue to be in practice in the tradition of Odissi music.[9]
The poet Jayadeva is known to have started the Mahari or Devadasi tradition at the Jagannatha temple of Puri, where every night the Gitagovinda is ritually sung & enacted in front of Jagannatha, continuing to this day. In the Jayabijaya Dwara inscription of Prataparudra Deba, the singing of Gitagovinda and adherence to the traditional Odissi ragas indicated by the poet has been referred to as mandatory. The Maharis were also banned from learning any other songs except the Gitagovinda ; this was considered an 'act of defiance towards Jagannatha'.[8]
Pt. Raghunath Panigrahi is known for his contributions in popularising the Gitagovinda through Odissi music & Odissi dance across the globe. Scholar-musicians such as Guru Gopal Chandra Panda have also attempted to reconstruct melodies of the ashtapadis of the Gita Govinda in adherence to the poet's original indications, and based on extant traditional rhythmic & melodic patterns in Odissi music.[9]

Gopala Nayaka[edit]
During the reign of Alauddin Khilji, Gopala Nayaka had an important role of popularising old Indian music. Some scholars from Odisha in the first part of the 20th century have written about local legend that states Gopala Nayaka was from Odisha.[10]
After the reign of Mukunda Deba in the 16th century, Odissi music suffered during the Maratha rule in Odisha during the 17th and 18th century AD.

British rule[edit]
Desaraja Maudamani Adiguru Singhari Shyamasundar Kar. Born in a sebāyata family of the Jagannatha temple of Puri, he is widely considered as one of the greatest Gurus of Odissi music in the twentieth century.Banikantha Nimai Charan Harichandan, iconic Odissi musician of the 20th century and pioneer of recording traditional Odissi music on gramophone records.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, Odissi music was chiefly patronised by local kings of princely states of Odisha. This included the Gajapati of Puri as well as the rulers of the kingdoms of Paralakhemundi, Mayurbhanj, Ghumusara, Athagada, Athagada Patana, Digapahandi (Badakhemundi), Khallikote, Sanakhemundi, Chikiti, Surangi, Jeypore, Ali, Kanika, Dhenkanal, Banapur, Sonepur, Baramba, Nilgiri, Nayagarh, Tigiria, Baudh, Daspalla, Bamanda (Bamra), Narasinghapur, Athamallik as well as places with a significant Odia population and cultural history such as Tarala (Tharlakota), Jalantara (Jalantrakota), Manjusa (Mandasa), Tikili (Tekkali) and Sadheikala (Seraikela). Rulers often patronised poet-composers and skilled musicians, vocalists and instrumentalists. Musicians were appointed in royal courts and honoured with land or other rewards. Many kings were themselves skilled musicians and poets, such as Gajapati Kapilendra Deba of Puri or Biswambhara Rajendradeba of Chikiti.

Treatises[edit]
A woman playing the Tanpura, c. 1735 (Rajasthan)
Music of India
Genres
Traditional

Classical
Carnatic
Odissi
Hindustani
Folk
Borgeet
Baul
Bhajan
Kirtana
Shyama Sangeet
Ramprasadi
Rabindra Sangeet
Nazrul Geeti
Dwijendrageeti
Atulprasadi
Prabhat Samgiita
Thumri
Dadra
Chaiti
Kajari
Sufi
Ghazal
Qawwali
Modern

Bhangra
Bhangragga
Blues
Filmi
Bollywood
Ghazal
Qawwali
Goa trance
Dance
Indi-pop
Asian Underground
Jazz
Rock
Bengali
Raga
Hip hop

Media and performance

Music awards
Filmfare Awards
Sangeet Natak Akademi Award

Music festivals
Saptak Festival of Music
Chennai Music Season
Dover Lane music festival
Purandaradasa Aradhana
Tyagaraja Aradhana
 Harivallabh Sangeet Sammelan

Music media
Sruti
The Record


Nationalistic and patriotic songs

National anthem
Jana Gana Mana

Other
Vande Mataram


Regional music
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar (Maithili)
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Ladakh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Ancient
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
vteSeveral dozens of treatises on music written in Odisha have been found. It is known that at least from the 14th century onwards, there was a continuous tradition of musicology in the state. Many of the texts have been critically edited and published by the Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi and the Department of Culture, Odisha. Of these, the core texts of Odissi music are:[1][11][12]
Gita Govinda of Jayadeva (12th century)
Sangita Sara of Hari Nayaka (14th century)
Gita Prakasa of Krusnadasa Badajena Mahapatra (15th century)
Sangita Narayana of Gajapati Narayanadeba, king of Paralakhemundi - written by Kaviratna Purusottama Misra (17th century)
Sangitarnava Chandrika of Nilakantha of Kalakala
Sangita Muktabali of Harichandana, king of Kanika
Natya Manorama of Raghunatha Ratha (also called Sangita Manorama)
Sangita Sarani of Kaviratna Narayana Mishra of Paralakhemundi
Sangita Kamoda of Kavibhusana Gopinatha Patra of Paralakhemundi
Kalankura Nibandha of Kalankura Muni
Sangita Sadananda of Sadananda Kabisurjya Brahma
Sangitasara Boli of Bandhu Binakara
Gitaprakasa Boli of Giri Gadadhara Dasa
Lakhyana Chandrodaya of Kabichandra Raghunatha Parichha of Paralakhemundi
Sangita Kamada
Sangita Kaumudi of unknown authorship
Sangita Nirnaya of Bira Narayana
Sangita Chintamani of Kamalalochana Khadgaraya
Jayadeva, the 12th century Sanskrit saint-poet, the great composer and illustrious master of classical music, has immense contribution to Odissi music. During his time Odra-Magadhi style music got shaped and achieved its classical status. He indicated the classical ragas prevailing at that time in which these were to be sung. Prior to that there was the tradition of Chhanda. A number of treatises on music have been found,[13][14] the earliest of them dating back to 14th century.
The musicologists of Odisha refer to a variety of ancient texts on music such as Bharata Muni's Natyashastra, Vishnu Purana, Shiva Samhita, Brahma Samhita, Narada Samhita, Parasurama Samhita, Gita Govinda, Kohaliya, Hari Nayaka's Sangitasara, Matanga Tantra, Mammatacharya's Sangita Ratnamala, Kalankura Nibandha, Panchama Sara Samhita, Raga Viveka, Sangita Chandrika, Sangita Kaumudi, Sangita Siromani, Vanmayaviveka, Shivavivekaprabandha, Sangita Damodara and more. The aforesaid texts are thus known to have been in vogue in Odisha during the post-15th century period.[1]

Characteristics[edit]
Odissi Sangita comprises four shastric classifications i.e. Dhruvapada, Chitrapada, Chitrakala and Panchali, described in the above-mentioned texts. The Dhruvapada is the first line or lines to be sung repeatedly. Chitrapada means the arrangement of words in an alliterative style. The use of art in music is called Chitrakala. Kabisurjya Baladeba Ratha, the renowned Odia poet wrote lyrics, which are the best examples of Chitrakala. All of these were Chhanda (metrical section) contains the essence of Odissi music. The Chhandas were composed by combining Bhava (theme), Kala (time), and Swara (tune). The Chautisa represents the originality of Odissi style. All the thirty four (34) letters of the Odia alphabet from 'Ka' to 'Ksa' are used chronologically at the beginning of each line.
A special feature of Odissi music is the padi, which consists of words to be sung in Druta Tala (fast beat).[15] Odissi music can be sung to different talas: Navatala (nine beats), Dashatala (ten beats) or Egaratala (eleven beats). Odissi ragas are different from the ragas of Hindustani and Karnataki classical music.
The primary Odissi mela ragas are Kalyana, Nata, Sri, Gouri, Baradi, Panchama, Dhanasri, Karnata, Bhairabi and Sokabaradi.[16]
Some of the distinctive and authentic ragas of the Odissi music tradition are : Abhiri, Amara, Ananda, Anandabhairabi, Ananda Kamodi, Ananda Kedara, Arabhi, Asabari, Bangala, Baradi, Basanta, Bhairabi, Bichitra Desakhya, Bichitradesi, Bichitra Kamodi, Chakrakeli, Chalaghanta Kedara, Chhayatodi, Chintabhairaba, Chinta Kamodi, Debagandhari, Debakiri, Desa Baradi, Desakhya, Desapala, Dhanasri, Dhannasika, Gauda, Gaudi, Ghantaraba, Gundakeri, Kali, Kalyana, Kalyana Ahari, Kamoda, Kamodi, Kaphi, Karnata, Kausiki, Kedara, Kedaragauda, Kedara Kamodi, Karunasri, Khambabati, Khanda Bangalasri, Khandakamodi, Kolahala, Krusna Kedara, Kumbhakamodi, Kusuma Kedara, Lalita, Lalita Basanta, Lalita Kamodi, Lalita Kedara, Lilataranga, Madhumangala, Madhumanjari, Madhura Gujjari, Madhusri, Madhu Saranga, Madhyamadi, Malasri, Malasrigauda, Mangala, Mangala Dhanasri, Mangala Gujjari, Mangala Kamodi, Mangala Kausiki, Mangala Kedara, Mallara, Manini (Malini), Marua, Megha, Meghaparnni, Misramukhari, Mohana, Mohana Kedara, Mukhabari (Mukhari), Nagaballi, Nagadhwani, Nalinigauda, Nata, Nata Kedara, Natanarayana, Natasaranga, Panchama, Punnaga, Punnaga Baradi, Pahadia Kedara, Panchama Baradi, Paraja, Rajahansi Chokhi, Ranabije, Rasakamodi, Rasamandara, Rasamanjari, Sabari, Saberi, Sankarabharana, Sindhukamodi, Sokabaradi, Sokakamodi, Soma, Sri, Suddhadesi, Surata, Suratha Gujjari, Todi.[17][18][19]
Odissi music is sung through Raganga, Bhabanga and Natyanga, Dhrubapadanga followed by Champu, Chhanda, Chautisa, Pallabi, Bhajana, Janana, and Gita Govinda.
Odissi music has codified grammars, which are presented with specified Raagas. It has also a distinctive rendition style. It is lyrical in its movement with wave-like ornamentation (gati andolita). The pace of singing in Odissi is not very fast nor too slow (na druta na bilambita), and it maintains a proportional tempo (sama sangita) that is very soothing.
Though there has been cross-cultural influence between Hindustani music and Persian music, Odissi music has remained relatively unaffected.[1]

Mardala[edit]
Main article: Mardala
 Mardala, the traditional percussion instrument of Odissi music
The Mardala is a percussive instrument native to the state of Odisha. It is traditionally used as the primary percussive instrument with Odissi music.[2] The Mardala is different from other instruments that might have similar names in the Indian subcontinent due to its unique construction, acoustic features and traditional playing technique.[20]
Raghunatha Ratha, an ancient musicologist of Odisha extols the Mardala in his treatise, the Natya Manorama as:[21]





ānaddhe marddaḻaḥ śreṣṭho
yatastallakṣaṇaṃbrube /




Among the membranophones,
Mardala is the superlative. 
So I narrate its features.








The Jagannatha temple of Puri has for centuries had a Mardala servitor. This was known as the 'Madeli Seba' and the percussionist was ritually initiated into the temple by the Gajapati ruler. The Mardala used to be the accompanying instrument to the Mahari dance, the ancestor of present-day Odissi dance, one of the major classical dance forms of India. In hundreds of Kalingan temples across the state of Odisha, including famous shrines such as Mukteswara and Konarka, the Mardala features prominently, usually in a niche of an alasakanya playing the instrument. There is a pose by the name mardalika replicating the same stance in Odissi dance.
The playing of the Mardala is based on the tala-paddhati or rhythmic system of Odissi music. A tala is a rhythmic structure in Indian music. The talas in use in Odissi music are distinctive, and are not found in other systems of Indian music. The regional terminology used in the Mardala's context are kalā, ansā, māna, aḍasā, bhaunri, bhaunri aḍasā, tāli, khāli, phānka, bāṇi, ukuṭa, pāṭa, chhanda, bhangi, etc.[15] The sabda-swara pata, a traditional component based on the Mardala's beats was integrated into Odissi dance by Guru Deba Prasad Das.[22] Though several hundred talas are defined in treatises, some are more common : ekatāli, khemaṭā or jhulā, rūpaka, tripaṭā, jhampā, āḍatāli, jati, āditala, maṭhā.[23] Other talas that are also used are nihsāri, kuḍuka, duāḍamāna, sarimāna, upāḍḍa, paḍitāla, pahapaṭa, aṭṭatāla, āṭhatāli and jagannātha. The talas have a characteristic swing that is typical of and universally found in Odissi music.
The Mardala is intimately associated with the Jagannatha temple and thus has a very esteemed position in the culture of Odisha. Many Gurus have worked for carrying forward the legacy of the instrument. Adiguru Singhari Shyamsundar Kar, Guru Banamali Maharana, Guru Kelucharan Mahapatra, Guru Padmanabha Panda, Guru Basudeba Khuntia, and Guru Mahadev Rout were among the great Gurus of Mardala in the 20th century.
Guru Rabinarayan Panda, Guru Janardana Dash, Guru Dhaneswar Swain, Guru Sachidananda Das, Guru Bijaya Kumar Barik, Guru Jagannath Kuanr  are among modern-day exponents of the Mardala. Many veteran Gotipua masters have also excelled in the Mardala : Guru Birabara Sahu, Guru Lingaraj Barik, Guru Maguni Das and others.

As a solo instrument[edit]
The role of the Mardala as a solo instrument has been presented for the last few decades with great success, apart from its better-known role as an accompaniment in the ensemble for Odissi music and dance.[24] The solo performances follow a specific rule or pranali : starting with a jamana, then proceeding onto chhanda prakarana, ragada, etc.[25] Guru Dhaneswar Swain is known for his pioneering efforts to promote solo performances of the Mardala and bring other traditional percussion instruments of Odisha onto the concert stage.[26][27][28] Guru Dhaneswar Swain, the first solo Mardala player who had presented an extended solo performance on the Mardala under the guidance of Guru Banamali Maharana, was the very first of its kind. 

 Guru Ramarao Patra, Odissi Bina (Veena) exponent, disciple of Acharya Tarini Charan Patra
Ensemble[edit]
The traditional ensemble accompanying an Odissi music recital is said to be 'binā benu mardala' : Bina or Veena, Benu or Flute and the Mardala. These form the three primary classes of instruments described in the shastras : tat or stringed, susira or wind and anaddha or percussive. All three instruments have been depicted in the stone temples & caves of Odisha built over the last two millennia. The three instruments were also officially appointed as sebāyatas in the Jagannatha Temple of Puri as described in the Madala Panji. Apart from these three instruments, some other traditional accompanying instruments are the gini, karatāla, khola or mrudanga, jodināgarā, mahurī or mukhabīnā, jalataranga etc. At least since the 18th century, other instruments such as the violin (behelā) and Sitar have also been employed.[8] The harmonium has become popular from the early twentieth century.
While the flute and Mardala continue to be popular, the Odissi Bina is no longer as widespread as it once used to be. Some of the exponents of the Odissi Bina were Sangitacharya Adwaita Guru and Gayaka Siromani Andha Apanna Panigrahi. The Odissi Bina (Veena) was spearheaded by Acharya Tarini Charan Patra in the twentieth century and is now kept alive by his disciple Guru Ramarao Patra.[29]

Relation with other classical music[edit]
 Veteran Odissi musician Shyamamani Devi, disciple of Adiguru Singhari Shyamasundar Kar and Sangita Sudhakara Balakrushna Das.
At one time the Kalinga Empire extended all the way up to the river Kaveri and incorporated major parts of Karnataka. Gajapati Purusottama Deva of Odisha conquered Kanchi and married the princess. Some raagas specific to Odisha are "Desakhya", "Dhanasri", "Belabali", "Kamodi", "Baradi" etc. Additionally, some Odissi raagas bear the same names as Hindustani or Carnatic raagas, but have different note combinations. Furthermore, there are many raagas that have the same note combinations in Hindustani, Carnatic and Odissi styles, but are called by different names. Each stream, however, has its own distinct style of rendition and tonal development despite the superficial similarity in scale.

Odissi music in modern times[edit]
The great exponents[13][14] of Odissi music in modern times are Adiguru Singhari Shyamsundar Kar, Astabadhani Acharya Tarini Charan Patra, Banikantha Nimai Charan Harichandan, Gokul Srichandan, Nrusinghanath Khuntia, Lokanath Rath, Lokanath Pala, Mohan Sundar Deb Goswami, Markandeya Mahapatra, Kashinath Pujapanda, Sangita Sudhakara Balakrushna Dash, Radhamani Mahapatra, Bisnupriya Samantasinghar, Bhubaneswari Mishra, Padmashree Shyamamani Devi, Dr. Gopal Chandra Panda, Padmakesari Dr. Damodar Hota, Padmashree Prafulla Kar, Padmashree Suramani Raghunath Panigrahi, Ramarao Patra (Bina/Veena), Ramhari Das who have achieved eminence in classical music.[29]

Classicality[edit]
The renowned scholar and cultural commentator Jiwan Pani mentions four parameters that any system of music has to satisfy in order to be called 'classical' or shastric :

The tradition must be over a century old.
The system must be based on one or more written shastras or treatises.
There must be a number of ragas at the core of the system.
The ragas at the core of the system and other acquired ragas must be delineated in a distinctive style.
Jiwan Pani further goes on to illustrate in his works each of these aspects with respect to Odissi music. The tradition of Odissi music is nearly a millennium old, there are several ancient musical treatises produced in the state of Odisha for several centuries, there are unique ragas and a distinctive manner of rendition. Pani further argues :[30]From the discussions above, it is evident that Odissi music is a distinctive shastric (classical) system. Again, it is now accepted that Odissi dance is undoubtedly a shastric style. Undoubtedly, music is the life breath of dance. Therefore, it will not be logical to say that the body, that is the Odissi dance, is shastric, but its life, that is, the music, is not shastric.Other scholars such as Pandit Dr. Damodar Hota[31] and Professor Ramhari Das have raised concerns over the apathy of the government & resultant lack of patronage towards preservation and popularisation of classical music traditions other than the two major systems.[32] Dr. Hota also points to the distortion of Odissi Music as some dance musicians since the 1950s catered their music solely to the revived dance form using Hindustani and Carnatic music as reference points instead of cultivating knowledge and mastery of the distinctive classicism and performance aspects of Odissi Music. Odissi music was not as well known as Odissi dance to musicians & dancers outside Odisha, which led to an appropriation of musical integrity and composition of dance music without adhering to the Odissi tradition. Performing Odissi dance to non-Odissi music was heavily criticised by traditional Gurus of both Odissi dance & Odissi music; it was seen as a disruption of the Odia tradition in which Odia language & literature blended harmoniously with Odissi music & Odissi dance.
Most recently, in order to popularize the Odissi music the State Government's Culture Department has undertaken a massive programme named 'Odissi Sandhya' to be performed in all major cities of the country. The programme is being executed through Guru Kelu Charan Mohapatra Odissi Research Centre in association with different cultural organizations located in different parts of the country, like Central Sangeet Natak Academy, Eastern Zonal Cultural Centre, Kolkata, and Prachin Kalakendra, Chandigarh.

Exponents[edit]




Sangitacharya Mahanta Sri Adwaita Guru






Guru Gokula Chandra Srichandana






Gayaka Siromani Apanna Panigrahi






Natyacharya Kabichandra Kali Charan Patnaik






Banikantha Nimai Charan Harichandan






Astabadhani Acharya Tarini Charan Patra






Adiguru Desaraja Singhari Shyamsundar Kar






Guru Nrusingha Natha Khuntia






Sangita Sudhakara Balakrushna Dash






Suramani Raghunath Panigrahi






Bhajana Samrata Bhikari Charan Bal






Vidushi Shyamamani Devi






Padmakesari Damodar Hota






Guru Gopal Chandra Panda






Guru Ramhari Das




Gurus of Odissi Mardala[edit]

Eminent Gurus of Odissi Mardala



Adiguru Singhari Shyamsundar Kar, who spearheaded a revival of traditional Mardala playing techniques of the Jagannatha temple






Guru Birabara Sahu, veteran Gotipua exponent






Guru Basudeba Khuntia






Guru Rabinarayan Panda






Guru Maguni Das, veteran Gotipua exponent






Guru Banamali Maharana, who received a 2004 Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for his contribution to Odissi Music and the Mardala






Guru Mahadeba Rout, recipient of Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi Award and 'Pandita' epithet from the Government of Odisha






Guru Janardana Dash






Guru Dhaneswar Swain, recipient of Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in the year 2013 for his contribution to Odissi Music and Mardala






Guru Sachidananda Das, Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi awardee






Guru Bijaya Kumar Barik






Guru Jagannath Kuanr






Guru Chintamani Raut






Guru Maheswar Mohapatra






Guru Gouranga Charan Mahala




See also[edit]
Jayadeva
Odia language
Gita Govinda
Mardala
Music of Odisha
Damodar Hota
Gopal Chandra Panda
Ramhari Das
Dhaneswar Swain
References[edit]


^ a b c d e f g h Parhi, Dr. Kirtan Narayan (2009). "Odissi Music : Retrospect and Prospect".  In Mohapatra, PK (ed.). Perspectives on Orissa. New Delhi: Centre for study in civilizations. pp. 613–626.

^ a b Parhi, Dr. Kirtan Narayan (2017). The Classicality of Orissi Music. India: Maxcurious Publications Pvt. Ltd. p. 383. ISBN 9788193215128.

^ Patnaik, Kabichandra Dr. Kali Charan. A Glimpse into Orissan Music. Bhubaneswar, Odisha: Government of Orissa. p. 2.

^ Tripathī, Kunjabihari (1963). The Evolution of Oriya Language and Script. Utkal University. p. 22. Retrieved 17 December 2022.

^ Mohanty, Gopinath (August 2007). "Odissi - The Classic Music" (PDF). Orissa Review. Culture Department, Government of Odisha. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 10, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2010.

^ Rath, Dr. Shantanu Kumar.  Mishra (ed.). "Odia Lokanatakaku Ganjamara Abadana" ଓଡ଼ିଆ ଲୋକନାଟକକୁ ଗଞ୍ଜାମର ଅବଦାନ [Role of Ganjam in Odisha's performing art traditions]. Rangabhumi (in Odia). Bhubaneswar: Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi, Department of Culture, Government of Odisha. 9: 52–64.

^ Patra, Sushanta Kumar; Patra, Dr. Benudhar. "Archaeology and the maritime history of ancient Orissa" (PDF). Odisha Historical Research Journal. XLVII (2): 107–118. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-10-29.

^ a b c d e f Das, Ramhari (2004). Odissi Sangeetara Parampara O Prayoga ଓଡ଼ିଶୀ ସଙ୍ଗୀତର ପରମ୍ପରା ଓ ପ୍ରୟୋଗ [The tradition and method of Odissi music] (in Odia). Bhubaneswar, Odisha: Kaishikee Prakashani.

^ a b c Panda, Dr. Gopal Chandra (1995). Sri Gita Gobinda Swara Lipi [Notated music of the Gita Govinda] (in Odia). Bhubaneswar: Smt. Bhagabati Panda.

^ Samanta, Basudeba (1927). Sangita Kalakara. Manjusa: Srinibasa Rajamani.

^ Badajena Mahapatra, Krusnadasa (1983).  Panigrahi, Nilamadhab (ed.). Geeta Prakash. Bhubaneswar: Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi.

^ Kavi, M. Ramakrishna (1999). Bharatakosa (A Dictionary to Technical Terms with definitions on Music and Dance Collected from the Works of Bharata and Others). Munshiram Manoharlal. ASIN B00GS1O0H4.

^ a b "Culture Department". Orissaculture.gov.in. Retrieved 2012-05-26.

^ a b "Orissa Dance & Music". Orissatourism.net. Retrieved 2012-05-26.

^ a b Hota, Dr. Damodar (2005). Sangita Sastra (in Odia). Vol. 1 (2 ed.). Bhubaneswar: Swara-Ranga. pp. 90–100.

^ Parhi, Dr. Kirtan Narayan (2007). Odisi Sangita : Kichi Jana Ajana Tathya [Odissi music : Some known and unknown facets] (in Odia). Ink Odisha, Bhubaneswar.

^ Panda, Pt. Gopal Chandra (December 2011). Odisi Raga Darpana (in Odia). Bhubaneswar.

^ Odisi Raga Sarani. Bhubaneswar: Odissi Research Centre. 2004.

^ Panda, Pt. Gopal Chandra (2004). Odisi Raga Ratnabali ओडिसी राग रत्नावली (in Hindi). Bhubaneswar. OCLC 225908458.

^ Mohanty, Gopinath (August 2007). "Odissi - The Classical Music". Orissa Review. Culture Department, Government of Orissa: 108–111.

^ Ratha, Raghunatha (1976).  Patnaik, Kali Charan (ed.). Natyamanorama (in Sanskrit). Bhubaneswar, Odisha: Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi.

^ Chakra, Shyamhari (3 November 2016). "Celebrating an alternate style of Odissi". The Hindu. Retrieved 28 July 2020.

^ Hota, Dr. Damodar (2012). Udra Paddhatiya Sangita (in Odia). Vol. 2. Bhubaneswar: Swara-Ranga. pp. 18–19.

^ Chakra, Shyamhari. "Moment of victory for Odissi Mardal". The Samikshya. Retrieved 4 September 2020.

^ Vidyarthi, Nita (6 February 2014). "His own beat". The Hindu. Retrieved 28 July 2020.

^ Nicodemus, Paul (10 October 2020). "Dhaneswar Swain: A Maestro of Odissi Mardal". The Dance India. Retrieved 2020-12-07.

^ "Dhaneswar Swain". Sangeet Natak Akademi. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ Chakra, Shyamhari (2020-11-23). "The missionary mardal maestro". The Samikhsya. Retrieved 2020-12-07.

^ a b "72-year-old Veena player of Odisha reviving the glory of the instrument". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 2020-11-27.

^ Pani, Jiwan (2004). Back to the Roots : Essays on Performing Arts of India. New Delhi: Manohar. ISBN 8173045607.

^ Rajan, Anjana (24 April 2009). "Dissenting Note". The Hindu. Retrieved 12 September 2020.

^ Vidyarthi, Nita (17 October 2013). "Raising his voice". The Hindu. Retrieved 28 July 2020.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Odissi music.

Graded video lessons on Odissi music by Guru Ramhari Das
YouTube channel of Guru Gopal Panda Odissi Academy
Odissi music renditions by eminent vocalists
Early gramophone records of Odissi music
vteOdissi musicCompositions
Odissi
Chhanda
Champu
Chautisa
Bhajana
Janana
Gita Govinda
Malasri
Charyapada
Instruments
Mardala
Mrudanga (Khola)
Khanjani
Bina
Composers
Kabirāja Jayadeva
Bachha Dasa
Damodara Dasa
Panchasakha (Balarama Dasa
Atibadi Jagannatha Dasa
Jasobanta Dasa
Sisu Ananta Dasa
Achyutananda Dasa)
Salabega
Dinakrushna Dasa
Kabi Samrata Upendra Bhanja
Biswanatha Khuntia
Brajanath Badajena
Banamali Dasa
Kabisurjya Baladeba Ratha
Utkala Ghanta Jadumani Mahapatra
Sadananda Kabisurjya Brahma
Bidagdha Kabi Abhimanyu Samantasinghara
Bhakta Charana Dasa
Kabikalahansa Gopalakrusna Pattanayaka
Sadhaka Kabi Gourahari Parichha
Kabichandra Raghunatha Parichha
Gauracharana Adhikari
Benudhara Pattanayaka
Gadadhara Singhasamanta
Lokanatha Pattnaik
Kabichandra Kalicharan Pattnaik
Treatises
Sangita Sara
Gita Prakasa
Sangita Narayana
Sangita Muktabalī
Sangita Kalpalatika
Sangitarnavachandrika
Sangita Koumudi
Gurus
Gokul Srichandan
Seikh Khan Mohammed
Basudeb Mahapatra
Lokenath Kanungo
Harihara Rayaguru
Gobinda Chandra Suradeo
Upendranath Tripathy
Prabhupada Mohan Sundar Deb Goswami
Gayaka Siromani Apanna Panigrahi
Kabichandra Kali Charan Patnaik
Shyamsundar Dhir
Banikantha Nimai Charan Harichandan
Astabadhani Acharya Tarini Charan Patra
Adiguru Singhari Shyamsundar Kar
Nrusingha Nath Khuntia
Jagabandhu Sahu
Markandeya Mahapatra
Paschimeswar Jena
Lokanath Rath
Kashinath Pujapanda
Biswanatha Pujapanda
Lokanath Pala
Sangita Sudhakara Balakrushna Dash
Sukadeb Patri
Bisnupriya Samantasinghar
Binapani Mohanty
Bina Debi
Binapani Mishra
Radhamani Mahapatra
Suramani Raghunath Panigrahi
Shyamamani Devi
Akhil Kumar Lenka
Padmakesari Damodar Hota
Bhajana Samrata Bhikari Charan Bal
Gopal Chandra Panda
Bhubaneswari Mishra
Sudha Mishra
Ramarao Patra (Bina)
Ramhari Das
Mardala
Singhari Shyamsundar Kar
Chakradhar Sahu
Padmanabha Panda
Mahadev Rout
Kashinath Muduli
Banamali Maharana
Dhaneswar Swain
Satchidananda Das
Kabyas
Gita Govinda
Usabhilasa
Rasakallola
Baidehisa Bilasa
Koti Brahmanda Sundari
Labanyabati
Bichitra Ramayana
Bidagdha Chintamani
Mathura Mangala
Kisorachandrananda Champu
Allied artforms
Odissi dance
Mahari
Goṭipua
Pala
Prahallada Nataka
Radha Prema Lila
Dasakathia
Bharata Lila
Rabana Chhaya
vteRagas of Odissi music
Abhiri
Ahari
Amrapanchama
Ananda
Ananda Kedara
Anandabhairabi
Andolita
Asabari
Bangala
Bangalasri
Baradi
Basanta
Basanta Baradi
Bhairaba
Bichitra Desakhya
Bichitra Kamodi
Chakrakeli
Chalaghanta Kedara
Chhayatodi
Chinta Kamodi
Chinta Bhairaba
Chokhi
Dhanasri
Debakiri
Debagandhari
Desa Baradi
Ghantaraba
Gouda
Goudi
Gujjari
Gundakiri
Hunchika
Jayanta
Kalingagouda
Kalyana Ahari
Kanada
Karnata
Kedara
Kedaragouda
Kedara Kamodi
Khambabati
Khanda Kamodi
Khanda Bangalasri
Kokila
Krusna Kedara
Lalita
Lalitaa
Lalita Basanta
Lalita Kamodi
Madhukiri
Madhusri
Malaba
Malabagouda
Malasri
Malasri Gouda
Marua
Mangala
Mangala Baradi
Mangala Dhanasri
Mangala Gujjari
Mangala Kamodi
Manjughosa
Manjughosa Kedara
Meghaparni
Mukhabari
Nagaballi
Nagadhwani
Nata Narayana
Pahadia Kedara
Panchama Baradi
Paraja
Punnaga
Punnaga Baradi
Ramakeri
Rasamanjari
Sabari
Sankarabharana
Sindhuda
Sindhu Kamodi
Sokabaradi
Soka Kamodi
Sri
Todiparaja
vteIndian musicMain
Music in ancient India
Indian classical music
Semi Classical music/Light classical music
Indian folk music
Indian classical music
Carnatic music
Hindustani music
Odissi music
Concepts
Shruti (music)
Swara
Alankara
Rāga
Tāla
Prahar
Hindustani classical musicTypes of compositions
Dhrupad
Dhamar
Khyal
Tarana
Thumri
Dadra
Qawwali
Ghazal
Thaats
Bilaval
Khamaj
Kafi
Asavari
Bhairav
Bhairavi
Todi
Purvi
Marwa
Kalyan
Principles of Hindustani music
Alap
Bandish
Gat
Types of Bandish
Sthaayi
Antara
Sanchaari
Aabhog
Variations of Bandish
Vilambit
Madhyalaya
Drut
Semi-classical music
Natya Sangeet
Baithak Gana
Sikh music
Indian folk music
Rabindra Sangeet
Bihu of Assam
Dandiya
Ganasangeet
Uttarakhandi Music
Lavani
Indian Light MusicIndian film music
Music of Bollywood
Indian play music
Natya Sangeet
Light songs in the play
Sugama Sangeetha
Region wise Indian Music
Bhojpuri
Rajasthani Music
Karnataka Sugam sangeet
Goa trance music
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Kashmir, Jammu and Ladakh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Language wise Music
Marathi Music
Hindi music
Kannada music
Telegu music
Tamil music
Assami music
Maharashtra music
Powada
Gan
Gavlan
Lavani
Kirtan

vteCulture of OdishaDanceClassical
Gotipua
Mahari
Odissi
Folk
Bagha Nacha
Chadheia
Chaiti ghoda
Chhau
Chutkuchuta
Dalkhai
Danda Nata
Dhan Koela
Dhuduki
Ghumura
Jhumar
Jodi sankha
Karma
Kandhei nacha
Kathi Kandhei
Keisabadi
Nachni
Naga nrutya
Pala
Rasarkeli
Ranapa
Sambalpuri
Samprada
Laudi nata
Lankapodi
Lila
Tamasa
Pasu nrutya
Patua
Sakhi Nata
Suanga
Tribal
Desia
Gadaba
Kandha
Koya
Onra
Paraja
Saura
Music
Odissi
Khanjani
Kendara
Dhumpa
Play, theatre andpuppetryPlay and theatre
Bharata Lila
Dasakathia
Dhanu Jatra
Jatra
Prahallada Nataka
Puppetry
Ravana chhaya
Sakhi kandhei
Wedding
Odia Hindu wedding
Festivals
Bali Jatra
Boita Bandana
Deepabali
Dola Jatra
Durga Puja
Nuakhai
Gamha Purnima
Kumar Purnima
Makar Sankranti
Manabasa Gurubara
Pana Sankranti (Maha Vishuba Sankranti)
Pousha Purnima
Prathamastami
Ratha Jatra
Raja
Samba Dashami
Savitri Brata
Sitalsasthi
Snana Jatra
Martial arts
Paika akhada
Handlooms
Baleswari bandha
Berhampuri
Bomkai (Sonepuri)
Dhalapathar
Gopalpur Tussar
Habaspuri
Kotpad
Ikat
Pasapali
Sambalpuri
Arts andHandicraftsArts
Pattachitra
Jhoti chita
Saura painting
Idital
Handicrafts
Chandua
Tarakasi
Ganjapa
Clay
Stoneworks
Wooden crafts
Bronze & Bell metal works
Dhokra
Architecture
Kalinga architecture
Deula
Calendar (Panjika)
Odia calendar
Anka year
 Category
vteOdia languageLanguage
Grammar
Dialects/VarietiesRegional
Baleswari
Kataki
Ganjami
Sundargadi
Sambalpuri
Desia
Minor
Kalahandia
Phulbani
Singhbhumi
Sociolects
Bodo Parja
Bhatri
Reli
Kupia
Scripts
Odia
Karani
Kalinga
Numerals
Odia Braille
Literature
Literature
Chautisa
Writers
Literary awards
Sahitya Akademi Award
Sahitya Akademi Translation Prize
Yuva Puraskar
Odisha Sahitya Akademi
Odisha Sahitya Akademi Award
Atibadi Jagannath Das Award
Culture
Odissi music
Odia calendar





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Odissi_music&oldid=1153473211"
Categories: OdissiOdissi musicOdia cultureIndian classical musicIndian styles of musicJayadevaClassical and art music traditionsHidden categories: CS1 uses Odia-language script (or)CS1 Odia-language sources (or)CS1 uses Hindi-language script (hi)CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi)CS1 Sanskrit-language sources (sa)Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles containing Odia-language textPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesPages using sidebar with the child parameterCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 6 May 2023, at 15:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





