



Puri district - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Name







2History


				Toggle History subsection
			




2.1Pre-history







2.2Early records







2.3History of the District as an administrative unit









3Geography


				Toggle Geography subsection
			




3.1River system







3.2Beaches









4Demographics







5Culture and tradition


				Toggle Culture and tradition subsection
			




5.1Temples







5.2Traditional Fairs and Festivals





5.2.1Religious festivals









5.3Dance and music





5.3.1Odissi dance









5.4Odissi music





5.4.1Mahari dance





5.4.1.1Folk dances









5.4.2Other folk dances









5.5Other notable sites





5.5.1Archeological Sites







5.5.2Theatres







5.5.3District museum Puri







5.5.4Libraries









5.6Puri district Culture Office









6Politics







7Notable people







8Villages







9References







10External links













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Puri district




31 languages



العربيةবাংলাBân-lâm-gúभोजपुरीCatalàCebuanoDeutschEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisગુજરાતીहिन्दीItalianoमराठीمصرىNederlandsनेपाल भाषाNorsk bokmålଓଡ଼ିଆپنجابیРусскийसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்తెలుగుاردوTiếng Việt中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


This article is about the district. For its eponymous headquarters, see Puri.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Puri district" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
District of Odisha in IndiaPuri districtDistrict of OdishaClockwise from top: Pipili Applique Work, Puri Abadha, Konark Sun Temple, Raghurajpur Pattachitra, Chilika Lake, Jagannath Temple, Puri, Chandrabhaga BeachLocation in OdishaCoordinates: 19°48′58″N 85°49′59″E﻿ / ﻿19.816°N 85.833°E﻿ / 19.816; 85.833Coordinates: 19°48′58″N 85°49′59″E﻿ / ﻿19.816°N 85.833°E﻿ / 19.816; 85.833Country IndiaState OdishaHeadquartersPuriGovernment • Collector & District MagistrateSamarth Verma, IAS • Superintendent of PoliceDr. Kanwar Vishal Singh, IPSArea • Total3,479 km2 (1,343 sq mi)Population (2011)[1] • Total1,698,730 • Density490/km2 (1,300/sq mi)Languages • OfficialOdia, EnglishTime zoneUTC+5:30 (IST)PIN752 xxxVehicle registrationOD-13Coastline150.4 kilometres (93.5 mi)Nearest cityBhubaneswarSex ratio1.032 ♂/♀Literacy85.37%Lok Sabha constituencyPuri
JagatsinhapurVidhan Sabha constituency6
 
105-Kakatpur(SC) 106-Nimapara 107-Puri 108-Brahmagiri  109-Satyabadi 110-Pipili
ClimateAw (Köppen)Avg. summer temperature37 °C (99 °F)Avg. winter temperature13.9 °C (57.0 °F)Websitewww.puri.nic.in
This article is part of a series onOdisha
Governance
Governors
Chief Ministers
Legislative Assembly
Political parties
High Court
Police

Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Odia Hindu wedding
Economy
Education
Elections
Festivals
Flora and fauna
Geography
Highest point
History
Historic sites
Maritime history
Rulers
Language
Script
Act
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Odissi (dance)
Odissi music
Politics
Sports
Tourism

Districts  Divisions
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Bhadrak
Boudh
Cuttack
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gajapati
Ganjam
Jagatsinghpur
Jharsuguda
Jajpur
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Koraput
Malkangiri
Mayurbhanj
Nabrangpur
Nayagarh
Nuapada
Puri
Rayagada
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh

GI Products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai Sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri Saree & Fabrics
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili applique work
Sambalpuri saree
Rasgulla

 India portalvte
Puri district is a coastal district of the Odisha state of India. It has one sub-division, 11 tahasils and 11 blocks and comprises 1722 revenue villages. Puri is the only municipality of the district. Konark, Pipili and Nimapara are the three NACs in this district. Satyabadi, Gop, Kakatpur and Brahmagiri are major semi-urban areas.


Name[edit]
The district is named after its capital city, Puri. In Sanskrit, the word "Puri" means town or city. The city is an important seat of Vaishnavism, and is home to the noted Jagannath Temple built by Anantavarman Chodaganga in the mid 12th century CE.[2]

History[edit]
Pre-history[edit]
Like many other parts of Odisha, the Puri district contains Pleistocene river gravels and silts. So far, no prehistoric stone tools have been found in this region, although they are found in similar formations (river gravels, secondary laterite pits and murrams) in the nearby districts of Dhenkanal, Mayurbhanj,  Kendujhar and Sundergarh.

Early records[edit]
In the dramatic poem Anargharāghava, believed to date from approximately the 9th century CE, the town of Puri was called Purusottama. The name of the town is given as Purusottama Kshetra in the records of Anangabhima Deva III from the 13th century CE. The town was given this name, or Purusottama Chhatar or simply Chhatar, in the records of the Mughal Empire, the Maratha Empire, and the early British rulers. In the Yogini Tantra and the Kalika Purana the town is referred to as Purusottam, and the Puri region was known as Utkal.
Purusottama Kshetra became referred to as Purusottama Puri, then contracted into Kshetra or Chhatra, or simply Puri. In many early British records this town is known by the name Pooree.

History of the District as an administrative unit[edit]
Under Mughal Rule (1592–1751), Odisha was divided into three circars for the purpose of revenue administration, Jaleswar, Bhadrak and Kataka. Current-day Puri was part of Kataka circar. After the Marathas occupied Odisha in 1751, they divided Odisha into the Pipli, Kataka, Soro and Balasore chakalas. The chakala of Pipli included major portions of the modern district of Puri.
After the conquest of Odisha by the British in 1803, the province was divided into the Northern and Southern Divisions with the river Mahanadi forming the boundary. Robert Ker and Charles Groeme were appointed as judge, magistrate, and collector in Northern and Southern Divisions respectively. By 1805 both divisions were amalgamated; Groeme was replaced, and Ker became the judge and magistrate of the whole province. By 1818 the Office of the Commissioner was established and Robert Ker became the first commissioner.
In October 1828, the province was divided into three districts, Balasore, Cuttack and Jagannath, which was later renamed Puri. In 1912, the new province of Bihar and Orissa was formed, including these three districts. Orissa (now Odisha) became a separate province in 1936 and was merged with the states of Nayagarh, Daspalla, Khandapara and Ranapur in 1948. A separate sub-division comprising these ex-states was added to Puri district, with headquarters at Nayagarh. Bhubaneswar was merged with the district in 1959. At this point the district comprised four sub-divisions: Puri Sadar, Khurdha, Bhubaneswar and Nayagarh.
By 1995, the area previously known as the Puri district was divided into three new districts:

Nayagarh district, comprising the old Nayagarh sub-division;
Khordha district, comprising the old Khuradha and Bhubaneswar sub-divisions; and
Puri district, comprising the old Puri Sadar sub-division.
Geography[edit]
The Puri district lies around the latitudes 19° and longitudes 84°29'E. It has a geographical area of 3051 km2 or 264988 Ha. It has varied geographical and geological divisions defined by rock types, soil, vegetation, water bodies and climate. The primary geological division is between the littoral tract and the level alluvial tract.
i) The littoral tract: This strip of the country lies between the level alluvial tract and the Bay of Bengal. Strong monsoon currents blow over the country for nearly 8 months of the year, producing sandy ridges parallel to the coast, varying from 6.5 km to a few hundred metres in width. These ridges stretch along the seashore for the full length of the sea coast, approximately150 km long. The littoral tract forms the dividing line between the Chilika Lake and the ocean.
ii) The level alluvial tract: The alluvial region is full of villages and rice fields, watered by a network of channels, through which the distributaries of the most southerly branch of the Mahanadi river find their way to the sea.

River system[edit]
The rivers of Puri district are generally tributaries of the Mahanadi river. They are largely dry or small streams in the hot season, while in the rains they receive more water than they can carry. Major rivers include:
1) Kushabhadra River: A branch of the Kuakhai River originates from Balianta and meets the Bay of Bengal at the shrine of Ramachandi, located 15 miles east of Puri. Its tributary Mugei joins with Kushabhadra.
2) Daya River: A branch of the Kuakhai river drains into the Chilika lake. Two small rivers, the Gangua and the Managuni, join with the Daya river below Kanas. The Daya river is believed to be the cause of silt build-up in Chilika Lake.
3) Bhargavi River: A branch of the Kuakhai river meets the Bay of Bengal after breaking up into numerous tributaries in the last two and a half miles of its course. Four main branches, the Kanchi, the East Kania, the Naya Nadi and the South Kanchi (which drains into Sar Lake) all derive from the left bank of the Kuakhai. The first three of these interconnect through several channels and finally join the Suna Munhi river, which in turn joins the Baliharchandi and ultimately drains to the Bay of Bengal via the mouth of Chilika. The South Kania dissipates in the marshes on the western shore of Chilika.
4) Kadua River: This is a monsoon fed river that drains into the Prachi River.
5) Prachi River: This river has its origin near Kantapara on Cuttack-Gop road and passes through the village of Kakatpur before draining into the Bay of Bengal.

6) Devi River: This is a branch of the Kathajodi River. Map of lake Chilka with near-by settlement of Puri.
Beaches[edit]
Notable beaches include: Puri Beach; the Golden Beach; Beleswar Beach; Swargadwar Beach; Balighai Beach; and the Chandrabhaga Sea Astaranga beach.

Demographics[edit]
Historical populationYearPop.±% p.a.1901527,283—    1911537,636+0.19%1921483,649−1.05%1931535,934+1.03%1941579,192+0.78%1951625,148+0.77%1961736,118+1.65%1971903,807+2.07%19811,105,471+2.03%19911,305,365+1.68%20011,502,682+1.42%20111,698,730+1.23%source:[3]



Religions in Puri district (2011)[4]

Religion

Percent


Hinduism
 
96.83%


Islam
 
2.71%


Other or not stated
 
0.46%




According to the 2011 census Puri district had a population of 1,698,730,[1] roughly equal to the nation of Guinea-Bissau[5] or the US state of Idaho.[6] This gives it a ranking of the 291st most populous district in India (out of a total of 640).[1] The district has a population density of 488 inhabitants per square kilometre (1,260/sq mi).[1] Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was  13%.[1] The ratio of females to males was 963:1000.[1] The literacy rate was 85.37%. 15.60% of the population lives in urban areas. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes make up 19.14% and 0.36% of the population respectively.[1]












Languages of Puri district (2011)[7]

  Odia (95.09%)  Urdu (2.36%)  Telugu (1.92%)  Others (0.63%)


At the time of the 2011 census, 95.09% of the population spoke Odia, 2.36% Urdu and 1.92% Telugu as their first language.[7]

Culture and tradition[edit]
Puri's recorded history dates from the third century BCE, and the district has varied religions and cultures. Hindus are in the majority, with monuments to Shaivism, Vaishnavism, Shaktism, Ganapatya, and Mahavir. Other important communities include Muslims, Sikhs, Jains and Christians.

Temples[edit]
Important monuments include:

 Konark Sun Temple
Jagannath Temple, Puri
Gundicha Temple, Puri
Lokanatha Temple, Puri
Jambeswar temple, Puri
Sun Temple, Konark
Barahi Temple, at Chourasi, in Nimapara Block
Mangala Temple, Kakatpur
Sakhigopal Temple, at Sakhigopal
Amareswar Temple, at Amareswar, Nimapara Block
Sculpture shed at Bishnupur, Nimapara
Gramswar Temple, Terundia, Nimapara
Alarnath Temple, Brahamgiri
Baliharachandi Temple, Brahamagiri Block
Kunteswar Temple, Araorh, Pipili Block
Harihar Temple, near Pipili
Shiva Temple, Jagadalpur at Delang Block
Tara image at Badatara, Gop
Bayalisbati Temple, near Gop
Mohabir Temple, Siruli Sadar Block
Sri Sri Bakreswar Temple at Balanga, Nimapara block
Baba Balunkeswar Temple at Arisandha, Nimapara Block
Nilakantha Temple and Chirnnamasta Temple at Biranarasinghpur Sasana.
Traditional Fairs and Festivals[edit]
Religious festivals[edit]
Makar mela at Chilika, January
Magha mela at Konark, January
Maha Shivaratri, February
Harirajpur Melan at Harirajpur, March
Amla Navami at Sakshigopal, March
Panchudola Balanga Melan at Balanga Melan field, Nimapara block, March
Sahi Yatra for seven days from Rama Navami, March/April
Chandan Yatra, April
Siruli Mahavir Mela during Pana Sankranti, April
Jhamu Yatra at Kakatpur, May
Baliharachandi Mela at Brahmagiri during the Raja Festival, June
Car Festival (Ratha Yatra), July
Gosani Yatra, Dasahara, September/October
Boita Bandan at Konark, October/November
Dayana chori at Ghorodia in Pipili Block
Anavasara at Alarnatha Mandira, Brahamagiri.
Snana Purnima celebration of Jagannath and Naga Jatra for three days at Rupadeipur, Pipli.[8]
Sitala sasthi yatra at Biranarasinghpur sasana.
Tourist Festivals

Konark Music & Dance Festival: Konark Natya Mandap, February
Basant Utshav: Parampara Raghurajpur, February
Sri Ksetra Mohotsav: Puri, April
Gundicha Utsav: Puri, June
Puri Beach Festival: Puri, November
Konark festival: Konark, December
These festivals feature Odissi dance and folk dances from different parts of the country.

Dance and music[edit]
The role of dance and music in temple rituals in Puri was important enough to set aside a separate enclosure, the Nata mandira, as a focal point.  Nata mandiras are typically decorated with figures in various poses of dance and musicians playing a variety of instruments.

Odissi dance[edit]
Main article: Odissi dance
 Sharmila Biswas performing Odissi in a dance festival in Kerala
Odissi dance is an ancient Indian classical dance form that originated in the Hindu temples of Odisha. Traditionally this dance form was taught to the devadasi (female temple dancers). In Odissi dances, the artists play out a mythical story, a spiritual message or devotional poem from the Hindu texts, such as Jayadev's Gita Govinda. After the abolition of the devadasi system, the traditional forms of the dance fell into disuse. Padmashri Guru Kelucharan Mahapatra was one of the gurus who revived the Odissi dance form in the mid-20th century.

Odissi music[edit]
Orissi music is a genre of Indian classical music originating from Puri. It is believed to date back to the 2nd century BCE, when Kharavela, king of Odisha, acted as a patron for this form of music and dance.[9]

Mahari dance[edit]
Mahari is a ritualistic dance form that was historically performed at the temple of Lord Jagannatha at Puri by devadasi dancers called maharis. After the abolition of the devadasi system, it is no longer danced at the Jagannatha Temple but continues as a cultural dance.

Folk dances[edit]
Gotipua dance is a folk dance of Puri, danced by boys under 14 years old, clad in female dress. The boys perform acrobatic figures inspired by the life of Radha and Krishna. The village of Raghurajpur is known for its Gotipua dance troupes.
Naga dances are danced by men wearing a heavy, elaborate costume including huge, highly decorated headgear and a false beard almost covering the face.
Medha dances are traditional dances in which the dancers wear a huge papier-mâché mask representing a demon or other character. Medha dancers participate in processions of temple idols on festival days such as Rama Navami.

Other folk dances[edit]
Other folk dances common in the district include Ghoda nacha, Dhuduki nacha, Jatra, Pala, Daskathia, Bhalu nacha, Mankada nacha and Navrang.

Other notable sites[edit]
Archeological Sites[edit]
Excavated archeological sites in Puri district include:

Kuruma or Kurum - This site is 8 km from Konark and contains the remains of a Buddhist monastery from the 10th century CE.
Manikapatana - This site is on the left bank of the Kushabhadra river, at the northern end of the Chilika Lake. It has been identified as the medieval port of Chelitalo described by the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang.
Khalkatapatna - on the Puri-Konark Marine Drive road is an ancient port that shows evidence of trade with Arabia and China in the 13th-15th centuries CE.[10]
Theatres[edit]
Annapurna Theatre is a pioneer in the field of theatrical performances.

District museum Puri[edit]
The District Museum at Puri is one of the branch museums of Odisha State Museum and is managed by the state government. It was established in 1997.

Libraries[edit]
The District Library of Puri and Panchasakha Memorial hall Library, Sakshigopal are both managed by the state government's department of culture.

Puri district Culture Office[edit]
The Puri district Culture Office promotes cultural activities and implements government policy relating to art and culture. This office manages the District Library of Puri, Panchasakha Memorial Hall Library at Sakhigopal, and the District museum of Puri. It organises cultural programmes and offers grants to registered libraries, cultural institutions, and indigent artists. It also serves as the liaison to the Orissa Sahitya Academy and the Sangeet Natak Akademi.

Politics[edit]
Main article: List of constituencies of Odisha Legislative Assembly
The Odisha Legislative Assembly constituencies[11][12] of Puri district and their elected members are listed below.[13]



No.

Constituency

Reservation

Extent of the Assembly Constituency (Blocks)

Member of 14th Assembly

Party


105

Kakatpur

SC

Konark (NAC),  Kakatpur, Astarang, Gop (part)

Tusharkanti Behera

BJD


106

Nimapara

None

Nimapara (NAC), Nimapara, Gop (part)

Samir Ranjan Dash

BJD


107

Puri

None

Puri (M), Puri Sadar (part), Gop (part)

Jayant Kumar Sarangi

BJP


108

Brahmagiri

None

Brahmagiri, Krushnaprasad, Puri Sadar (part)

Lalidendu Bidyadhar Mohapatra

BJP


109

Satyabadi

None

Satyabadi, Kanas

Uma Samantray

BJD


110

Pipili

None

Pipili (NAC), Pipili, Delanga

Rudra Pratap Maharathy

BJD


Notable people[edit]
Gopabandhu Das
Nilakantha Das
Kelucharan Mohapatra
Manasi Pradhan
Raghunath Mohapatra
Sudarshan Patnaik
Villages[edit]
Lunahar
References[edit]


^ a b c d e f g "District Census Handbook 2011 - Puri" (PDF). Census of India. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India.

^ Cesarone, Bernard (May 16, 2001). "Pata-chitras of Orissa". www.asianart.com. Retrieved 2019-11-30.

^ Decadal Variation In Population Since 1901

^ "Table C-01 Population by Religious Community: Odisha". Census of India, 2011. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India.

^ US Directorate of Intelligence. "Country Comparison:Population". Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved 2011-10-01. Guinea-Bissau 1,596,677 July 2011 est.

^ "2010 Resident Population Data". U. S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 2011-09-30. Idaho 1,567,582

^ a b "Table C-16 Population by Mother Tongue: Odisha". Census of India 2011. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India.

^ "Rath Yatra: Snana Purnima Likely To Be Held With Minimum Servitors". ODTV. Retrieved May 21, 2020.

^ Mohanty, Gopinath (August 2007). "Odissi - The Classic Music" (PDF). Wayback Machine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-04-10. Retrieved 2019-11-30.

^ Tripati, S.; ManiMurali, R.; Jayakumar, S.; Pradhan, A. K.; Behera, R. P.; Choudhury, R. (July 2015). "Khalkattapatna port: The lost archaeological heritage of Odisha, east coast of India" (PDF). Current Science (India). 109: 372–377.

^ Assembly Constituencies and their EXtent

^ Seats of Odisha

^ "List of Member in Fourteenth Assembly". ws.ori.nic.in. Archived from the original on 2 May 2007. Retrieved 19 February 2013. MEMBER NAME


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Puri district.

Official website
Places adjacent to Puri district
Khordha district
Cuttack district
Jagatsinghpur district







Puri district







Ganjam district

Bay of Bengal

vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal
vtePuri districtConstituencies
Brahmagiri
Kakatpur
Nimapara
Pipili
Puri
Satyabadi
Towns and villages
Alipada
Astaranga
Biranarasingh Pur
Biratunga
Brahmagiri
Ganeswarpur
Gop
Konark
Nimapada
Parikud
Pipili
Puri
Raghurajpur
Satpada
Basudeipur
Other districts
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Bargarh
Bhadrak
Boudh
Cuttack
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Gajapati
Ganjam
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Koraput
Malkangiri
Mayurbhanj
Nabarangpur
Nayagarh
Nuapada
Rayagada
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh

vteMahanadi–Brahmani–Baitarani basinRivers
Baitarani
Bhargavi
Brahmani
Daya
Devi
Hasdeo
Ib
Jonk
Kathajodi
Koina
Kuakhai
Kushabhadra
Mahanadi
Mand
North Karo
Ong
Pairi
Sankh
Shivnath
Sondur
Surubalijora
South Karo
South Koel
Tel River
Dams, barrages
Dudhawa Dam
Gangrel Dam
Hasdeo Bango Dam
Hirakud Dam
Mandira Dam
Rengali Dam
Sondur Dam
Geographical features
Dandakaranya
Dakshina Kosala
Chota Nagpur Plateau
Western Orissa
Mahanadi River Delta
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Riparian districtsChhattisgarh
Dhamtari
Kanker
Raipur
Janjgir–Champa
Raigarh
Jashpur
Korba
Koriya
Surguja
Madhya Pradesh
Anuppur
Jharkhand
Gumla
Khunti
Ranchi
West Singhbhum
Odisha
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Mayurbhanj
Sundergarh
Boudh
Angul
Jajpur
Cuttack
Kendrapara
Khordha
Jagatsinghpur
Puri
Languages/ people
Baiga
Bonda
Gondi
Kol
Kurukh
Munda
Santal
Hindi
 Chhattisgarhi
Oriya
Sambalpuri
Coalfields
Jhilimili
Chirimiri
Korba
Mand Raigarh
Ib Valley
Talcher
Industries
Korba Super Thermal Power Plant
Talcher Super Thermal Power Station
Talcher Thermal Power Station
Transport
NH 5
NH 6
NH 42
NH 78
NH 111
Second Mahanadi Rail Bridge
Tatanagar–Bilaspur section and Bilaspur–Nagpur section of Howrah–Nagpur–Mumbai line
Jharsuguda–Vizianagaram line
Other basins
Damodar
Godavari
Kosi
Narmada
Son

vteHindu temples in OdishaBhubaneswarShiva temples
Aisanyesvara Siva Temple
Akhadachandi Temple
Astasambhu Temples
Bhima Kunda
Bhringesvara Siva Temple
Bhrukutesvar Siva Temple
Brahmeswara Temple
Byamokesvara Temple
Chakreshvari Siva Temple
Champakesvara Siva Temple
Chandrasekhara Mahadeva Temple
Chintamanisvara Siva Temple
Devasabha Temple
Dishisvara Siva Temple
Gangesvara Siva Temple
Gosagaresvar Siva Temple
Jaleswar Siva Temple Precinct
Kalika Siva Temple
Kapilesvara Siva Temple
Kedareswar Temple
Labesvara Siva Temple
Ladu Baba Temple
Lakhesvara Siva Temple
Lingaraj Temple
Madneswar Siva Temple
Mangalesvara Siva Temple
Manibhadresvara Temple - II
Mukteswar Temple
Nagesvara Temple, Bhubaneswar
Pabaneswara Temple
Papanasini Siva Temple
Parsurameswar Temple
Purvesvara Siva Temple
Rajarani Temple
Rameshwar Deula
Sarvatresvara Siva Temple
Siddhesvara Siva Temple
Subarnesvara Siva Temple
Suka Temple
Sukutesvara Temple
Svapnesvara Siva Temple
Talesvara Siva Temple
Tirthesvara Siva Temple
Uttaresvara Siva Temple
Vaital Deula
Yameshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Ananta Vasudeva Temple
Bharati Matha
Gandhi Garabadu Precinct Vishnu Temple
Ram Mandir, Bhubaneswar
Vishnu Temple, Bhubaneswar
Shakti temples
Chausathi Jogini Temple
Parvati Temple, Odisha
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Bindusagar
Hanuman Temple, Kedara-Gouri
Sivatirtha Matha
Cuttack districtShiva temples
Chateshwar Temple
Dhabaleswar
Simhanath Temple
Vishnu temples
Madhava Temple
Shakti temples
Bhattarika Temple
Charchika Temple
Cuttack Chandi Temple
Durga Temple, Baideshwar
Durga Temple, Motia
Other temples
Brahma Temple, Niali
Puri districtShiva temples
Beleswar Temple
Lokanatha Temple
Markandeshwar Temple
Vishnu temples
Alarnatha Mandira
Chakra Narasimha Temple
Gundicha Temple
Jagannath Temple, Puri
Narasimha Temple, Puri
Sakshigopal Temple
Shakti temples
Bata Mangala Temple
Kakatpur Mangala Temple
Mausi Maa Temple
Ramachandi Temple
Varahi Deula, Chaurasi
Vimala Temple
Sun temples
Konark Sun Temple
Other temples
Govardhana matha
Emar Matha
Western OdishaShiva temples
Kosaleswara temple
Leaning Temple of Huma
Vishnu temples
Nrusinghanath Temple
Patali Srikhetra
Shakti temples
Lankeswari Temple
Samaleswari Temple
Sureswari temple
Other temples
Harishankar Temple
Sasisena Temple
Rayagada districtShiva temples
Bhimashankar
Chatikona
Nilakantheswar Temple
Pataleswar
Vishnu temples
Jagannath Temple, Gunupur
Jagannath Temple, Rayagada
Laxminarayan temple, Therubali
Shakti temples
Maa Markama Temple
Majhighariani Temple
OtherShiva temples
Ajaikapada Bhairava Temple
Akhandalamani Temple
Annakoteshvara Temple
Bhuvaneshwar Temple, Boudh
Chandaneswar
Gupteswar Cave
Godhaneswar temple
Indralath Temple
Kapilash Temple
Murga Mahadeva Shrine
Nilakantheswar Temple
Panchalingeshwar
Sekhareswar Temple
Vishnu temples
Anantasaayi Vishnu Temple
Ananta Shayana
Anantashayana Vishnu
Baladevjew Temple
Chhatia Bata
Jagannath Temple, Baripada
Jagannath Temple, Dharakote
Jagannath Temple, Koraput
Jagannath Temple, Nayagarh
Khirachora Gopinatha Temple
Lakhmi Varaha Temple
Narayana Gosain Temple
Nilamadhav Temple
Odogaon Raghunath Temple
Varahanatha Temple
Shakti temples
Bhadrakali Temple, Aharapada
Bhagabati Temple, Banapur
Biraja Temple
Ghanteswari Temple
Goddess Maheshwari
Kalijai
Kanaka Durga, Raulapalli
Kichakeshwari Temple
Maa Barunei Temple
Maa Tarini Temple, Ghatgaon
Maa Ugra Tara
Maa Markama Temple
Mahishamardini Temple
Majhighariani Temple
Manikeshwari Temple
Marichi temple
Mausimaa Temple
Metakani Temple
Narayani Temple
Saptamatruka Temple
Sarala Temple
Siddha Bhairavi
Taratarini Temple
Upper Bagh Devi Temple
Sun temples
Biranchinarayan Temple, Buguda
Biranchinarayan Temple, Palia
Ganesha temples
Budha Ganesha Temple
Mahavinayak Temple
Siddha Vinayaka
Other temples
Bhandara Ghara Shrine
Hanuman Vatika
Harihara Deula
Joranda Gadhi

Shakti temples in Odisha
Shiva temples in Odisha
Temples in Bhubaneswar

Authority control International
VIAF
National
Germany
Israel
United States





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Puri_district&oldid=1152488798"
Categories: Puri district1828 establishments in IndiaDistricts of OdishaHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2022All articles needing additional referencesArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataPages using infobox settlement with bad settlement typePages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesCoordinates on WikidataCommons category link from WikidataArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiers






 This page was last edited on 30 April 2023, at 15:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





