



Ganjam Kewda Flower - Wikipedia




























Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Usage







2Types


				Toggle Types subsection
			




2.1The male plant - flower







2.2The female plant - flower









3Kewra Flower's extracts


				Toggle Kewra Flower's extracts subsection
			




3.1Kewra Ruh (Oil)







3.2Kewra Attar (Perfume)







3.3Kewra Jal (Hydrosol)









4Kewda Industry in Ganjam







5References













Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents







Ganjam Kewda Flower




2 languages



বাংলাଓଡ଼ିଆ
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Ganjam Kewda FlowerGeographical indicationAlternative namesKia, Ketaki, White lotusTypeflowerAreaGanjam, OdishaCountryIndiaMaterialFlower
Ganjam Kewda is a male flower of the fragrant screwpine plant used for extracting kewda oil in India. A native to the tropics, it is registered (on Application No. 229) under the Geographical Indications (GI) of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act by Government of India. Kewda scent is produced in Chhatrapur, Brahmapur, Gopalpur and Jagannathpur in district of Ganjam, Odisha. Although kewda plants can be found through most of India, 90% of the commercial production of the kewda flower is estimated to occur in the Odisha state.[1]
The flower of the kewda plant grows on a small tree or shrub; it is both cultivated and grows wild in coastal areas. The plant can also be found in some inland districts but the flowers seem to create their most exquisite floral bouquet in certain coastal localities, the most famous being the Ganjam district of Odisha. The tree can reach a height of 18 feet, with dense branches supported by aerial roots that can form a thick, almost impenetrable jungle. The long leaves possess prickly spines along the edges and mid-ribs making the plant tough to handle for those not familiar with the handling and harvesting techniques. The male flower "spikes" (or inflorescence) are 25–50 cm (10–20 in) long. Along the central stalk of each spike one can find many flowers, each encased in a fragrant cream-colored spathe (a spathe is a protective leaf enclosing a flower). A fully mature kewda tree produces about 30 to 40 flower spikes each year weighing 5 to 6 each ounces each.[2]


Usage[edit]
Kewra is used to flavor foods and for Ayurveda healing. The kewra plant grows wild along the east coast of India. The plants many think that create the best floral bouquet are grown in Ganjam district of South Odisha. Rampe plant (Pandanus amaryllifolius Roxb) is different from Kewra plant. The fragrant leaves of Rampe plant (Pandan Patta) are used to flavor rice and curries.

Types[edit]
Kewra plant is dioecious, with male and female flowers produced on different plants. In Sanskrit, the plant is called Ketaki. The male plants are called 'Ketaki Viphala', and the female plants and called 'Swarana Ketaki'.

The male plant - flower[edit]
Only the flowers of the male plant are harvested to extract the floral bouquet to produce kewra. The flower's bouquet is sweet, similar to rose flowers, with also some fruity notes. The plants flower three times a year (Summer, Monsoon, and Winter). A majority of the flowers that provide the best floral bouquet grow during monsoon season (July–September). Some 30% of the flowers grow during summer (May–June), and remaining 10% grow during winter (October–November). The creamy white color flowers are encased in long spikes about one foot long. On average, one mature plant can produce about 35 flower spikes, each weighing about 5 to 6 ounces.

The female plant - flower[edit]
The flower of female plant has no floral bouquet. It is left to develop into fruit.[3]

Kewra Flower's extracts[edit]
The kewda flowers extracts sold in the market are:

Kewra Ruh (Oil)[edit]
This is 100% pure oil extracted from male kewra flowers. It takes about 1,000 flowers (370 pounds) to produce one ounce of Kewra Ruh. In Ayurveda, the oil is used as a stimulant, and to treat rheumatoid arthritis

Kewra Attar (Perfume)[edit]
The Kewra flowers are distillated into sandalwood oil. Kewra Attar has about 3% to 5% Kewra oil, and the remainder is Sandalwood oil. Normally, it is specified in terms of number of flower spikes (10,000 to 15,000) per pound of sandalwood oil,
This is the most popular perfume used in India. It is applied behind ears, and used to scent clothes. The perfume is also added to various cosmetics.

Kewra Jal (Hydrosol)[edit]
The fragrant hydrosol (distillate of an essential oil) may be either a primary product from low quality flowers collected during hot summer, or it may be a secondary product from Kewra Ruh or Attar production. Kewra Jal is also called Kewra water. Kewra Jal is about 0.02% of Kewra oil. 24 flowers can produce one pound of primary hydrosol.
The hydrosol is used to flavor popular sweets such as Rasgulla, Rasmalai, and Ghulab Jamun. It is used to flavor rice dishes such as biryanis.

Kewda Industry in Ganjam[edit]
The kewda flower and its rhu, produced after processing the flowers, is also unique to the region. The flower grows in at least four coastal blocks of the district - Chhatrapur, Rangeilunda, Ganjam and Chikiti. The Kewda oil is extracted by processing the flowers in distilleries. Around 250 processing units, locally known as bhatis, were engaged in processing the flowers.
Apart from its use in the perfume industry, the oil of the thorny flower is used in preparing gutka (a stimulant that causes mouth cancer). After the ban on manufacture and sale of gutka in several states, including Odisha, most of the processing units have stopped operations. [4]

References[edit]


^ Dey, S.c. (2016-01-30). Fragrant Flowers for Homes and Gardens, Trade and Industry. Abhinav Publications. p. 150. ISBN 9788170173359. Retrieved 30 January 2016.

^ "Kewda, From the Travel Journal. Kewda - Orissa's Fragrant Floral King". whitelotusaromatics.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016.

^ "What is Kewra? Kewra-Ruh Kewra-Attar Kewra-Jal". www.Indiacurry.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016.

^ mohanty, hrushikesh. "Berhampur charts silk route to recognition". Times Of India. Retrieved 30 January 2016.


vte State of OdishaCapital: BhubaneswarState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of Odisha
Song: Bande Utkala Janani
Animal: Sambar
Bird: Indian roller
Flower: Ashoka
Tree: Sacred fig
Fish: Mahanadi mahseer
Governance
Governors
Chief ministers
Legislative Assembly
Constituencies
High Court
Police
Elections
Politics
Human Rights Commission
History
Kalinga
Rulers
Mahameghavahana dynasty
Murunda dynasty
Nala dynasty
Mathara dynasty
Pitrbhakta dynasty
Shailodbhava dynasty
Bhauma-Kara dynasty
Bhanja dynasty
Somavamshi dynasty
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Gajapati Empire
Bhoi dynasty
Orissa Tributary States
Utkal Sammilani
Historic sites
Maritime history of Odisha
Geography
Flora and Fauna
Forests
Utkal Plains
Garhjat Hills
Chilika Lake
Deomali (Highest point)
Abdul Kalam Island
DistrictsbydivisionNorthern
Angul
Balangir
Bargarh
Debagarh
Dhenkanal
Jharsuguda
Kendujhar
Sambalpur
Subarnapur
Sundergarh
Central
Balasore
Bhadrak
Cuttack
Jagatsinghpur
Jajpur
Kendrapara
Khordha
Mayurbhanj
Nayagarh
Puri
Southern
Boudh
Gajapati
Ganjam
Kalahandi
Kandhamal
Koraput
Malkangiri
Nabrangpur
Nuapada
Rayagada
Cities
Angul
Balangir
Balasore
Barbil
Bargarh
Baripada
Bhadrak
Bhawanipatna
Bhubaneswar
Berhampur
Cuttack
Dhenkanal
Jajpur
Jharsuguda
Jeypore
Joda
Kendrapara
Kendujhar
Khordha
Paradeep
Puri
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Talcher
GI products
Berhampur Patta
Bomkai sari
Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics
Ganjam Kewda Flower
Ganjam Kewda Rooh
Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics
Habaspuri sari
Khandua
Konark stone carving
Kotpad Handloom fabrics
Odisha Ikat
Pattachitra
Pipili appliqué work
Odisha Rasagola
Sambalpuri sari
Topics
Arts
Cinema
Cuisine
Culture
Day
Economy
Education
Festivals
Language
Act
Script
Literature
Grammar
People
Tribes
Sports
Tourism
 India portal




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ganjam_Kewda_Flower&oldid=1145610159"
Categories: Geographical indications in OdishaPandanus






 This page was last edited on 20 March 2023, at 01:39 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





